Title: A Prisoner's Dilemma
Date: 2007-09-15 23:54:19
Category: general
Slug: a-prisoners-dilemma
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: driving, traffic, suvs, game, theory, prisoners, dilemma, parking
Summary: 


Los Angeles traffic provides fertile grounds for situations that can be
modeled with the [Prisoner's
Dilemma](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prisoner's_dilemma). It's not
difficult to guess what strategy the owners of the Toyota Land Cruiser
and the Chevy Tahoe have decided to play :

![](http://vort.org/media/images/asshole_suvs.jpg)

I encountered these two defectors in an extremely crowded parking
structure in Old Town Pasadena. This isn't just antisocial behavior. The
owners of these two titanic vehicles are also breaking the clearly
written rules.

It occurs to me that the decision to buy these vehicles in the first
place can also be modeled using many, many iterations of the Prisoner's
Dilemma played against every other driver. Here's how such a model might
be constructed. The options are :

-   Buy an SUV (defect)
-   Buy a compact car (cooperate)

In a single round of Prisoner's Dilemma, it is usually reasoned that the
only rational choice is to defect. However, when two individuals play
many iterations against one another, more interesting strategies can
succeed. The strategy that seems to do the best in most situations is
some variant of generous, randomly forgiving tit-for-tat. To apply the
Prisoner's Dilemma to the automobile market, you must view the game as
continuously ongoing because a player can trade in their car for a
different model at any time, and the game is played against every other
driver on the road. Each iteration makes a marginal contribution to the
total outcome for the player. For example, the actual risk of death is
the sum over the marginal risk of death arising from the outcome of each
game.

The outcomes are :

<p>
<center>
<table border="0" cellpadding="2">
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td align="center" colspan="2">
Player's Choice

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
</td>
<td>
</td>
<td align="center">
defect

</td>
<td align="center">
cooperate

</td>
<tr>
<td align="center" rowspan="2">
Stranger's\
Choice

</td>
<td align="center">
defect

</td>
<td valign="top">
<small>**Punishment for Mutual Defection**

<p>
Both players buy an SUV, negating the advantages of owning a larger
vehicle. Both players are penalized with substantial marginal increases
in traffic congestion, gas prices, risk of death, risk of injury, and
rate of damage to shared environmental resources.</small>

</td>
<td valign="top">
<small>**Sucker's Payoff**

<p>
Player suffers moderate marginal increase of gas prices, traffic
congestion, and rate of destruction of shared environmental resources
than the Punishment for Mutual Defection. However, the player suffers a
worse view of the road and substantially increased marginal risk of
death and injury.</small>

</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td align="center">
cooperate

</td>
<td valign="top">
<small>**Temptation**

<p>
Player suffers a moderate marginal increase of gas prices, traffic
congestion, and rate of destruction of shared environmental resources
than the Punishment for Mutual Defection. They also enjoy better view of
the road and a substantially reduced marginal risk of death or
injury.</small>

</td>
<td valign="top">
<small>**Reward for Mutual Cooperation**

<p>
Both the Player and the Stranger enjoy a better view of the road and
substantial marginal reductions in gas prices, traffic congestion, rate
of destruction of shared environmental resources, and risk of death and
injury.

</td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>

In computer models of the iterated Prisoner's Dilemma, and in real-world
situations are well represented by the model, strategies that are
"nice," "generous" and "forgiving" tend to thrive. These terms have a
technical meaning here. "Nice" simply describes a strategy that will not
defect first, "generous" describes strategies that will not retaliate
against other players when they defect under some circumstances, and
"forgiving" describes strategies that will "forget" about past
defections of other players. Richard Dawkins describes this in some
detail in [*The Selfish
Gene*](http://www.amazon.com/Selfish-Gene-Anniversary-Introduction/dp/0199291152/ref=pd_bbs_sr_1/102-2661605-3879330?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1189925434&sr=8-1)
(see Chapter 12: Nice Guys Finish First), basing much of his argument on
the research of [Robert
Axelrod](http://scholar.google.com/scholar?q=+Axelrod+prisoner's+dilemma).

If the automobile market really can be modeled using the iterated
Prisoners Dilemma, then we would expect to see the most successful
strategies in Axelrod's tournaments, which are mostly "nice," become the
dominant strategy for car-buying. That is to say, we should see mostly
compact cars. So, why do people keep buying SUVs? They are playing
Defect against the rest of us, hoping to receive the Temptation outcome
from most of the iterations of the game.

This is especially curious because because both the Punishment for
Mutual Defection and the Sucker's Payoff are very severe. It doesn't
take very many people playing Defect to block the view on the road, to
drive up gas prices, to dramatically increase the risk of death an
injury for all drivers, and to accelerate the rate of destruction of our
shared environment. The Reward for Mutual Cooperation should be a very
strong attractor in the problem space.

It's very tempting to think of SUV buyers as stupid, or as assholes, or
as sociopaths. However, it is more useful to model the decision as a
purely rational decision based on what they think will be the best
strategy. For most people, it probably isn't a rational choice, but that
doesn't actually matter. In the model, we pretend that the players are
playing *as if* they are making rational choices. This is how computers
play Prisoner's Dilemma, even though they aren't capable of rational
choices.

Game theory offers a fairly convincing (and rather grim) explanation for
the phenomenon of SUVs. It makes less sense to play Cooperate if you
don't think the game will go on for much longer. On the last round of
the game, it becomes the classic, non-iterated Prisoner's Dilemma for
which the only rational choice is Defect. Everyone knows that we're
running out of oil. Consciously or unconsciously, people are behaving in
a way that suggests that the shadow of the future is shortening.
