Title: A Riposte
Date: 2007-04-30 07:48:16
Category: general
Slug: a-riposte
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: 
Summary: 


Oh dear, [I seem to have been
noticed](http://asmba.typepad.com/veterans/2007/04/blogger_russell.html).

Before I begin my riposte, I need to set something straight. Mr.
Dougherty, you have put words in my mouth that I did not and shall not
utter. You seem to believe that the conclusions I draw about the wisdom
and feasibility of the war in Iraq preclude any appreciation for the
oath you, and millions of others, have taken to defend our country. With
respect, sir, don't be an ass. It is rhetorically convenient to suppose
that those who call you on your errors are incapable of respecting you.
I don't mind saying that I respect your commitment to our country. I
respect the sacrifices you have have made and risked -- which, since we
are having this argument, were thankfully not as terrible as they might
have been. I respect the commitment and dedication on your part that
must have been required to serve.

But my respect for you, and your brothers and sisters in arms, does not
call for genuflection. It does not give you the license to make
pronouncements on whether or not I take for granted the rights you swore
to protect. I won't belittle the nobility of your service, but I won't
tolerate your sanctimonious finger-wagging either.

I called you out as a Republican, not a conservative, because your post
is simply package of recycled RNC and Whitehouse talking points:

-   Pessimism about the war hurts the troops
-   Admitting Failure == Surrender
-   Demand an apology for an imaginary insult on behalf of hypothetical
    people (double points if the uttering of the imaginary insult is
    required by the target's job description)
-   Pessimism about the war hurts our diplomatic position
-   Opposing The War == Not Supporting The Troops
-   We could still win if only \_\_\_\_\_\_ would let us
-   Draw a parallel, *any* parallel, between the Iraq War and World War
    II

Listen to any speech by Mr. Bush about the war, and you'll find at least
one or two of those. Ditto for practically any stump speech by a
Republican candidate in 2004 or 2006. It's all political blather. I'm
picking on you because you are clearly smart enough to come up with your
own opinions, but instead you are regurgitating the electioneering
twaddle of a bunch of political hacks.

Not all politicians are hacks. Even among this disastrous crop
Republicans, there are those who have detectable levels of Principle and
Decency. You can spot them easily enough; they're the ones who've been
slouching around the Capitol looking shamefaced and embarrassed.

But more important to the point at hand, *you* don't need to be a hack
too. You claim to be motivated by conservatism, so perhaps you should
meditate on the principles espoused therein. The conservative
intellectual framework rests upon the principles of prudence, caution
and the admission only of postulates supported by strong empirical
evidence. It isn't anything so crude as the "ideology" for which you
mistake it. The position you take on the war, and the war itself, is not
"conservative" at all. It is either radical or reactionary, depending on
how you look at it. The war was not prudent; it was gratuitous. The war
was not cautions; it was reckless. The evidence supporting the war was a
potpourri of cheap forgeries, bloviation, bureaucratic doublespeak, and
wild speculation. As a liberal, I find it bizarre and unsettling to have
to extol the virtues of conservationism. I wish the Republican party
would send its nutcases home and try to remember some of the wise words
of Lincoln, Taft and Eisenhower. Then maybe we could have a debate about
*ideas* instead yelling about who is more patriotic.

Anyway, setting aside your misuse of the word "obsession," I fail to see
how your commendably concise definitions of "insurgency" and
"counterinsurgency" are somehow different from the phenomena I discussed
in my previous post. Except, perhaps, for one minor point: The
government of Iraq can hardly be credited for the counterinsurgency
operation underway there. It's our people doing the work, taking the
risks, and getting killed. The Iraqi government is engaged in
counterinsurgency operations in about the same way that Paris Hilton is
a plastic surgeon; the operations are carried out on their *behalf* by
*someone else* who *knows what they are doing*, and in both cases, the
efforts are wasted. Paris Hilton is still ugly, and the Iraqi government
is still doomed.

I can only assume that you mention the viciousness and horror of the
terrorist actions of the insurgency because you wish to imply that I do
not care. Since it offends your sensibilities so, I shall refrain from
flexing the more rustic aspects of my vocabulary; they cannot, in any
event, capture the profound vulgarity of your suggestion. But as
terribly as my heart aches for the lives snuffed out by this ongoing
brutality, I know that America's counterinsurgency effort in Iraq *is*
an impossible mission. We cannot stop the bombings, no matter what we
might try.

Maybe if we had a million troops to send to Iraq, and a time machine to
send them to 2003, maybe then we could stop this slaughter of innocents.
But not now, not with an army trained for a different mission and
equipped barely even for that. Not when the mission depends on
stretching the Army, Marines and even the Reserves to the breaking
point, and holding them at the breaking point indefinitely. Not with 15
month tours of duty under mind-wrecking conditions. Not when our injured
veterans come home to mildewing hospital beds and are left to rummage in
the Goodwill bin for a pair of underpants. Not after letting Saddam
Hussein be lynched by a mob of Sadrist hooligans after a wartime show
trial, when he should have been executed after an internationally
recognized tribunal. Not after Abu Garib. Not after sending 700,000
Iraqis to early deaths. Yes, sometimes counterinsurgency operations can
work. But not in Iraq in 2007. It has already gone too far.

As for your final note, had you taken your own recent advice and Googled
the quote, you would have found that it was very much in context. Taft
was a staunch isolationist, and the remarks of his that I quoted relate
specifically to the war, not the New Deal. No, when he made those
remarks twelve days after Pearl Harbor, not even Taft, the ardent
isolationist, could call the war "won" or "lost." But he and his party
did indeed blame Roosevelt and Lend Lease for provoking the attack on
Pearl Harbor (a conjecture not without some merit). Taft openly
attempted to obstruct the drive to mobilize America for the war against
the Axis powers -- as was his right and his *duty* as per his principles
and his office.

You can find the episode in any decent history book or biography of the
major personalities involved (particularly Roosevelt and Eisenhower).
Most recently, it appeared in an [article in Salon about Tom
Daschle](http://dir.salon.com/story/politics/feature/2002/03/19/dissent/index.html).

As for Veteran's day, regrettably, my gallery of Veteran's Day
photographs is offline at the moment. I will remedy this as soon as
possible.
