Title: And now, some astronomy
Date: 2009-08-03 02:36:20
Category: general
Slug: and-now-some-astronomy
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: science, astronomy
Summary: 


For the last couple of weeks or so, Jupiter has been bright enough to
cast a visible shadow on a moonless night. I'd been peering at it
through the trees as I walk around town, thinking about buying a
telescope. Then [news came about the Black Smudge on
Jupiter](http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2009-112),
[discovered by amateur astronomer Anthony
Wesley](http://jupiter.samba.org/) -- on a homebrew Newtonian -- and I
thought, "That's it. I'm buying a telescope."

The problem is, I've never owned a telescope. When I was a kid, we had
an ancient four inch refracting telescope, but it was missing some
crucial parts, like the focusing drawtube, parts of the tripod, and one
of the cast iron counterweights was broken in half (probably from coming
unscrewed and dropping on the pavement). I played with it a lot, but for
obvious reasons I never got to actually do any astronomy with it. When I
lived in Ohio, I once used the Natural History Museum's incredible
[500-mm Dall-Kirkham
Cassegrainian](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apollo_Observatory) to peer
at Saturn.

Almost all of my telescope knowledge I owe to my college Optics course
and its lab section, and the endless mind-numbing, poorly worded
homework problems involving lenses and mirrors and pictures of carrots
(I never found out why the objective was always a carrot). I could
probably design a simple telescope on paper, but calculating a
magnification factor and peering through a scope are very different
experiences. I've been rummaging through telescope reviews on the
internet for years, wondering how much I would really care about this or
that optical aberration, or if I should spend more money to have less of
it.

I decided to buy a really inexpensive telescope just to have a point of
reference. This is what I've been playing with all weekend :

![](http://vort.org/media/images/celestron_firstscope.jpg)

This is a Celestron FirstScope, purchased from Amazon.com for \$43.
Stephen R. Waldee wrote a
[ridiculously](http://faintfuzzies.blogspot.com/2009/06/celestron-firstscope-76-mm-review-part.html%0A)
[detailed](http://faintfuzzies.blogspot.com/2009/06/celestron-firstscope-76-mm-review-part_21.html)
review of this little thing.

When I was in eighth grade, everyone had to buy a Texas Instruments
TI-82 graphing calculator. At the time, I had a computer (an elderly
Macintosh SE loaned by a friend's mother, who had upgraded to a Quadra),
but this was back when compilers were comically expensive. I could run
programs, but I couldn't write them. The TI-82 wasn't as powerful as the
Mac SE, but it did have a very well designed built-in BASIC interpreter
and a fantastic library of functions. While my algebra teacher was
tediously reviewing the previous day's homework, I tuned out and taught
myself programming, Boolean algebra, functional formalism, iterative
numerical methods, graphics, animation, and all sorts of other cool and
useful things. Those stolen hours in eighth grade led directly to a
degree in physics, four years working as a computational physicist, and
graduate school in computational biology. The TI-82 was available, and
it was extremely well-designed despite its limitations. In fact, I
learned as much from what the TI-82 *couldn't* do as I learned what it
could.

That's kind of what I have in mind for the FirstScope.

Anyway, I've been having a grand old time looking at Jupiter and the
Galilean moons. Here's (more or less) what I've been seeing :

![](http://vort.org/media/images/jupiter_and_moons_G03.png)

This is a 1 second exposure using a Takahashi TOA-150 that I rented for
a few minutes using [Global
Rent-a-Scope](http://www.global-rent-a-scope.com/). This guy beats the
stuffing out of my telescope (the Takahashi is a \$27,000 instrument!),
but I'm really not using it for its intended purpose. What I see with
the 4mm eyepiece on my telescope is essentially the same as what you see
above.

I checked [Stellarium](http://www.stellarium.org/) to see which moons
are which. From left to right, it's Callisto, Ganymede, Jupiter, Io,
Europa, and the star HIP 107302.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/jupiter_and_moons_stellarium.png)

[Jupiter will occult HIP
107302](http://www.iota-es.de/jupiter2009/jupiteroccultation.html) later
today. This is kind of neat, since HIP 107302 is bright enough to see
with the naked eye (at least when Jupiter isn't near it). If you Google
for "Jupiter HIP 107302," you'll find that it's the brightest star
Jupiter will occult for the next hundred years. Light from HIP 107302
will illuminate Jupiter's atmosphere from behind, and, I presume, yield
some interesting data about its structure and composition for people
suitably equipped to make such measurements.

Just for fun, and to be fair to the Global Rent-a-Scope people, here's
another shot I took around midnight of Andromeda that really shows off
the Takahashi's beautiful optics.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/M31_GRAS03.jpg)

This is a 600 second exposure. I could probably do better if I fiddled
with the exposure a bit, or did a color series instead of a single
exposure, or knew anything about post-processing astrometric
photography.

I've looked at M31 with my own little telescope, but all I see is a dot
where the central core is. On the other hand, I was using the telescope
sitting on the hood of a car in my apartment building parking lot under
an obnoxious buzzing outdoor lamp. No night vision whatsoever. My
verdict is that I've already gotten \$43 worth of astronomy out of the
FirstScope, and I haven't even used it under decent viewing conditions.
