Title: Asshats
Date: 2006-10-26 16:08:04
Category: general
Slug: asshats
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: politics
Summary: 


I remind Rush Limbaugh apologists that Parkinson's disease is
degenerative and ultimately fatal. Michal J. Fox is in the process of
dying. He has decided to let America watch him die in the hopes that we
might learn something.

This isn't some cheap political stunt. This is a man's life. Whatever
your position on stem cell research, at least have the decency to
respect Mr. Fox's effort to die a meaningful death. He is doing these
commercials because he hopes, as most people do, that stem cell research
may one day lead to treatments that help people suffering from
Parkinson's disease (as well as other injuries and conditions).

It's too late for Mr. Fox. He's doing this to help *other* people.

I suppose Rush would have said Christopher Reeves was exaggerating the
way in which he just lay there in his chair, or deliberately let his
sentences get cut off when his respirator whistled and clicked. You
know, for dramatic effect. He was an actor, after all, and worse yet, a
liberal Hollywood type. He'd do anything for attention. Sadly, it seems
empathy is beyond the ken of some people.

The horrible truth of the matter is that someday soon, Michal J. Fox
will die. Parkinson's disease does not usually allow a photogenic death,
but given his bravery thus far, it would not surprise me if Mr. Fox
keeps working until the bitter end. Then Mr. Limbaugh can talk about how
"shameless" it was for Mr. Fox to exaggerate the pain and misery of his
own death to push his "agenda."

Like most liberal types, I support stem cell research, and I'm proud to
have Marty McFly, Superman and the great state of California on my side.
