Title: Back from Uzon
Date: 2010-08-10 20:49:27
Category: general
Slug: back-uzon
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: science, grad, school, life, kamchatka, thermophiles, russia, eisenlab, metagenomics, research
Summary: 


![*Panorama overlooking Orange Fields in Uzon Caldera*](http://vort.org/media/images/orange_field_overlook.jpeg)
 
We just arrived back in Petropavlovsk after a week in the field. I was
very sad to leave Uzon, and it was a privilege and an honor of the
highest order to have spent those days there.

The expedition was, I think, a great success. We'll know for sure once
we're back at our labs and can use more sophisticated methods to examine
our samples. I am very confident, though.

It was a bit touch-and-go right at the end. Our high speed centrifuge
crapped out last night, just as Sarah was in the middle of the last big
run of DNA extractions. The Russian team brought their own centrifuge,
but we couldn't run it on our generator. Much to our relief, Albert was
able to magically get the thing working again by holding it at just the
right angle. They worked through the night to finish processing the
samples; I think Albert must have had his thumb wedged under the
centrifuge for the entire run.

I'm sorry I wasn't able to send many Twitter updates toward the end of
the expedition. Once I had identified my sampling targets, I suddenly
had a lot less free time on my hands (and I didn't have much to begin
with). Also, I'm sorry for updating in ALL CAPS. Iridium handsets are
essentially 1993 technology. Composing text messages is extremely
painful, and the battery only lasts long enough to compose two or three
of them. This is a pain when you have to recharge on generator power,
and the generator only cranks up for a few hours a night, and even then
only to power lab equipment for DNA extractions. Hats off to my dad for
relaying the messages!

Right now, I'm sitting in a friendly internet cafe in Petropavlovsk
where they've let me use their wireless connection. When we arrived at
our crowded little apartment, the hot water was broken, and thus no
showers yet. A wide selection of interesting geologic samples are wedged
under my fingernails, and I think I have wads of some sort of hardened
liquid sulfur caked in my hair. The helicopter arrived ridiculously
early, and we just barely get everything aboard. As a result, I'm still
wearing my field clothes from yesterday, which are splattered with
volcanic mud. I may actually be the worst-smelling person in
Petropavlovsk. Perhaps it is fortunate that this internet cafe caters
mainly to kids playing StarCraft.

I composed blog entries for each day we were in Uzon, and I'll be
posting them as soon as I run them past the rest of the team. I also
have almost two thousand photos to sort, tag and upload.

That said, I have a correction for one of my Twitter updates. I wrote :

> ` YERTERDAY ALBERT & TEAM WERE CHASED AWAY FROM A SITE BY A BEAR THAT WAS ACTUALY A BUSH IN THE FOG.`

Albert pointed out that they were interrupted for a few minutes, but not
actually chased away. He stepped forward and shouted see if he bear (or
bears) would go away, with his signal torch uncapped and ready. The
bears were revealed to be bushes as the wind shifted and created a
channel in the mist. It's funny, but given how foggy it was that day, it
wasn't actually that surprising. We were at the same site the next day,
and were surprised by an *actual* bear. It wandered pretty close to us
before we could actually see it (the full story will come with the
article for that day).

![*A bear interrupting important
[EisenLab](http://bobcat.genomecenter.ucdavis.edu/mediawiki/index.php/Main_Page)
work at Boiling Spring.*](http://vort.org/media/images/bear_encounter.jpeg) \
 
**Update** : Albert also says that I'm wrong about having to wedge his
thumb under the centrifuge the whole time. It started working again
after shaking it around in the air a bit, and placing it just so on the
table. He only had his thumb wedged underneath it for a minute or two to
check to see if it was overheating.
