Title: Borax Lake : Sample collection and processing
Date: 2011-10-01 01:57:15
Category: general
Slug: borax-lake-sample-collection-and-processing
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: science, grad, school, davis, eisenlab, metagenomics, research, genomics
Summary: 


I've admired [Rosie Redfield's
lab-notebook-as-blog](http://rrresearch.fieldofscience.com/) from the
moment I started reading it, and I've been looking for an excuse to
~~steal~~ ~~pilfer~~ ~~abscond with~~ adapt her idea. However, most of
the work I've been doing up to this point has been computational, and
try as I might, I can't make myself keep a lab notebook for programming.
That's what things like [GitHub are for](https://github.com/ryneches/).
I've started actually doing some of the laboratory and field work for my
thesis project, and so I finally have an excuse to do some open lab and
field notebook blogging.

Rosie might be amused to that I'm starting off with some work I'm doing
at an arsenic-heavy lake, although Borax Lake is known more for boron
than arsenic. If I bugger up my assays, I just hope she'll get on my
case in the comments before I submit anything for publication.

I will write more about this as I go along, but my goal for my thesis
project is to try to get an idea about the modality of microbial
migration. Specifically, I want to know if microbial taxa, when they
colonize a new environment, arrive individually or as an existing
consortium. I hope to find out by reconstructing population structures
from metagenomic samples from widely dispersed but ecologically similar
environments.

I learned about Borax Lake from [Robert
Mariner](http://wwwrcamnl.wr.usgs.gov/hydrotherm/Mariner.htm) of the US
Geological Survey, who was kind enough to respond to my emails and
patiently discuss his survey results over the course of several lengthy
telephone calls. He also volunteered a lot of useful information, such
as which sites have rattlesnakes and where they are likely to be found,
and helped enormously in search and selection of sampling sites. Without
this help, I probably would have had to give up on this project as I
originally imagined it.

Borax Lake was one of many thousands of sites across the American West
surveyed over a 40 year long [project USGS project led by Ivan Barnes
and Robert Mariner](http://hotspringchem.wr.usgs.gov/) to study the
chemistry and isotopic composition of mineral springs. Extensive
analysis of Borax Lake water was conducted by in August of 1972 by John
Rapp, and again in July of 1991.

Dr. Mariner pointed out that [Borax Lake is administered by the Nature
Conservancy](http://www.nature.org/ourinitiatives/regions/northamerica/unitedstates/oregon/placesweprotect/borax-lake.xml),
and a little bit of Googleing and emailing got me in touch with Jay
Kerby, the Southeast Oregon Project Manager for the Nature Conservancy.
Jay was very helpful, and walked me through the process of obtaining
sampling permits for my project.

Before I talk about Borax Lake, I need to say that it is absolutely
essential that you obtain explicit, written permission before collecting
samples. As scientists, we've got to get this stuff right if we want to
avoid [stuff](http://rebeccaskloot.com/the-immortal-life/)
[like](http://www.nytimes.com/2006/11/28/science/28yell.html)
this.
The fact that some researchers did not (for whatever reason) obtain
permission to use the cells they used to make important discoveries, or
did not cooperate in good faith with the originators of those cell
lines, has made it *much* more difficult for me to do my own research.
Kary Mullis, if you're reading this, thanks for PCR (really), but...

![](http://vort.org/media/images/AreYouKiddingMe.png)

Anyway, I'm not sure if Borax Lake itself is going to be a good
candidate for my project (it has very unique chemistry), but it is
surrounded by ephemeral pools of brine that may be good analogs to
coastal salt ponds. You could think think of this as island
biogeography, but inverted; I'm looking for islands of ocean isolated by
oceans of land.

![http://vort.org/media/images/borax_lake_1.jpg](http://vort.org/media/images/borax_lake_500.jpg)

The lake itself has a very peculiar mineralized ledge a few inches above
the shore. The water has been precipitating an extremely hard material
for a very long time. I tried to collect a small amount of it to examine
in the lab, and discovered that it is as hard as concrete. Even with the
aid of a hammer, I couldn't dislodge any small pieces. I didn't want to
damage the ledge itself by taking a larger piece, so I left without any
samples of the precipitated material. Borax Lake is sitting atop a
thirty foot high pedestal of this stuff.

![<a href="http://vort.org/media/images/borax_lake_area.jpg">Full size</a>](http://vort.org/media/images/borax_lake_area_500.jpg)

The Nature Conservancy has been working on some plans to make the site
more accessible, but I don't imagine it will get many visitors. It is
*way* off the beaten path. Next time I visit, I'm going to bring a
truck. The lake is off of a very lonely state road, up several miles on
unpaved, unmarked fire roads, followed by a few miles of ATV tracks. A
horse would probably the the ideal way of getting there, but my trusty
little Toyota still managed.

![<a
href="(http://vort.org/media/images/borax_lake_hotspring.jpg">Close
up</a>](http://vort.org/media/images/borax_lake_hotspring_500.jpg)

This is one of the hotsprings just north of Borax Lake. The first record
I have of it is from May 1957 by D.E. White of the USGS. It was visited
again in June 1973 by Robert Mariner, and again in September 1976 by
Robert Mariner and Bill Evans. The next visit was in July 1991 by Robert
Mariner. I measured a surface temperature of 65&deg;C. To my surprise, I saw
a couple of Borax Lake chubb swimming around near the cooler (but not
much cooler) periphery.

![<a href="http://vort.org/media/images/borax_lake_sampling.jpg">Full
size</a>](http://vort.org/media/images/borax_lake_sampling_500.jpg)

I took four kinds of samples : Unprocessed water samples in 500ml
bottles, unprocessed sediment samples in 50ml conical tubes, processed
water samples for environmental DNA in Sterivex filters, and processed
sediment samples for environmental DNA using Zymo's Xpedition Soil/Fecal
miniprep kits. I divided the unprocessed samples between the freezer and
the 37&deg; room, and I'll save my notes on the filtered water samples for
another article.

One of the unusual things about the Xpedition miniprep kit is that the
first spin column is not a DNA binding column; it's more like a
crap-catcher. So, you are supposed to keep the flow-through, not discard
it as you would with a DNA binding column. John got a little ahead of
himself, and discarded the flow-through from four columns before he
realized the protocol was different from, well, just about all of the
other DNA extraction mini-preps on the market. Fortunately, I collected
many extra samples. Also, when I split the work between John and myself,
I split up the samples into evens and odds, so that neither of us would
be working on all of one group of replicates.

This led to an important lesson : **Do *not* discard the lysis tubes
after you've removed the supernatant.** It occurred to me that the
wreckage of beads, muck and buffer at the bottom of the spent tubes was
probably full of DNA, so I added 500 &mu;L of molecular-grade water,
vortexed them, and put them back into the centrifuge at 10,000g for a
minute, and spun the supernatant through the orange-capped columns. Two
of the four yielded plenty of DNA. I'd probably have gotten more if I'd
used lysis buffer instead of water, and the bead-beater instead of the
vortexer.

I'm still not totally sure what rationale to apply for the last step.
The Xpedition miniprep lets you elute the DNA with anywhere from 10 to
100 &mu;L of buffer. If you use less elution buffer, you get less total
DNA, but the DNA you get will be at higher concentration. Elute with
more, and you get more DNA, but at lower concentration. The actual
amount of DNA can vary over four orders of magnitude, and so guessing
right is very helpful. But... impossible. I decided to elute in 50 &mu;L,
and that seems to have worked OK for my purposes.

I then measured the DNA concentration in a Qubit fluorometer with
Invitrogen's Quant-iT high sensitivity assay for dsDNA. Because this
requires me to go one-by-one, this is not how I would like to quantify
my samples in the future. But, for thirty seven samples, it was easy
enough.

  -------- ------- ----------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------
  Sample   &mu;g/mL   Source                        Description
  1        0.723   Don Edwards Wildlife Refuge   Salt crystals from site A23
  2        0.582   Don Edwards Wildlife Refuge   Salt crystals from site A23
  3        0.531   Don Edwards Wildlife Refuge   Salt crystals from site A23
  4        0.824   Don Edwards Wildlife Refuge   Salt crystals from site A23
  5        0.209   Don Edwards Wildlife Refuge   Salt crystals from site A23
  6        27.8    Don Edwards Wildlife Refuge   Mat community from site A23
  7        -       Don Edwards Wildlife Refuge   Mat community from site A23 (field processing failed)
  8        2.57    Borax Lake                    Sediment (poor collection)
  9        44.9    Borax Lake                    Sediment
  10       44.9    Borax Lake                    Sediment
  11       25.1    Borax Lake                    Sediment
  12       47.1    Borax Lake                    Sediment
  13       48.2    Borax Lake                    Sediment
  14       41.2    Borax Lake                    Sediment
  15       41.2    Borax Lake                    Sediment
  16       40.9    Borax Lake                    Sediment
  17       26.1    Borax Lake                    Sediment
  18       31.6    Borax Lake                    Sediment
  19       -       Borax Lake                    Sediment (lost during extraction)
  20       81.6    Borax Lake                    Sediment
  21       35.6    Borax Lake                    Sediment
  22       35.9    Borax Lake                    Sediment
  23       -       Borax Lake                    Mat community from hot spring
  24       -       Borax Lake                    Mat community from hot spring
  25       3.13    Borax Lake                    Mat community from hot spring
  26       44.0    Borax Lake                    Mat community from hot spring
  27       -       Borax Lake                    Mat community from hot spring (salvaged sample)
  28       -       Borax Lake                    Mat community from hot spring
  29       2.76    Borax Lake                    Mat community from hot spring (salvaged sample)
  30       -       Borax Lake                    Mat community from hot spring
  31       -       Borax Lake                    Mat community from hot spring (salvaged sample)
  32       -       Borax Lake                    Mat community from hot spring
  33       0.72    Borax Lake                    Mineralized mat community from hot spring
  34       22.8    Borax Lake                    Mineralized mat community from hot spring
  35       100     Borax Lake                    Mineralized mat community from hot spring
  36       29.2    Borax Lake                    Mineralized mat community from hot spring
  37       39.2    Borax Lake                    Mineralized mat community from hot spring (salvaged sample)
  -------- ------- ----------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------

For the 19 samples that had DNA concentrations above about 20 &mu;g/mL, I
ran a gel to check the size distribution. It looks like the Zymo
miniprep performed about as well as they claimed; most of the fragments
seem to be between 5 and 10 kilobases, with a fair amount of DNA in
fragments larger than 10 kilobases.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/edwards_borax_xtr_500.jpg)

I only need about a picogram of input DNA for each transposase
tagmentation library, and I only need fragments bigger than about 3
kilobases. So, this process exceeds my absurdly modest requirements by a
lot.

I should mention that [Anna-Louise Reysenbach](http://alrlab.pdx.edu/)
graciously lent me a pH probe to use in the field after mine turned out
to be dead as a doornail. Issac Wagner, a postdoc in her lab, spent a
couple of hours helping me get their field probe calibrated with my
meter. Unfortunately, their probe turned out to be in only somewhat
better condition than mine, and Anna-Louise asked that I leave it in
Portland rather than risk taking bad data with it. I drove directly from
Borax Lake to the UC Davis Genome Center in about seven hours, and
immediately took the chemical measurements on our benchtop pH meter. It
didn't work out, but I still greatly appreciate the help from
Anna-Louise and Issac! (Also, thanks goes to my little sister Anna, who
has to take Portland's MAX over to Portland State to return the ailing
pH probe.)
