Title: Buying the War
Date: 2007-04-28 08:25:23
Category: general
Slug: buying-the-war
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: politics
Summary: 


I watched [Bill Moyers's "Buying the
War"](http://www.pbs.org/moyers/journal/btw/watch.html) a few days ago,
and I finally think I have something to say about it. A lot of people
will probably be inclined to skip this report rather than face
frustration of seeing, one more time, just how badly we screwed up. It
is indeed saddening and frustrating to contemplate the sequence of
events that led up to the invasion of Iraq.

However, for some reason, I didn't feel that way at all after watching
this report. It's odd, in a way. The report is utterly damning --
damning of the media, of the administration, of Congress, and implicitly
damning of the public for allowing itself to be bamboozled. Yet,
somehow, I came away feeling relieved.

This is the first time I've seen the whole sequence of events, chapter
by chapter, explored in specific detail. After something terrible has
happened, it is always worthwhile to go back and give it a really hard
look. It's not just to learn from the mistakes; it's also to try to draw
a line around the episode. This mental encapsulation is an important
coping mechanism. It is what keeps the taint of disaster from seeping
into everything. It is what allows us to distinguish between the
disaster and unimpacted or unrelated events. It places finite bounds on
the scope of the disaster, huge though it may be. This is why the 9/11
Commission Report is important.

Most people who would criticize the Administration, Congress or the
Media would construct their indictments on the strength of hindsight.
They said one thing, one would argue, but we now know that it was wrong.
This is the natural way to proceed. If you want to construct a strong
argument, it is best to use the strongest evidence. The strongest
evidence is always available after the fact. Ergo, an argument from
hindsight is usually the strongest.

For example: The President said Iraq had weapons of mass destruction.
We've now searched every inch of Iraq, and there weren't weapons of mass
destruction. Therefor, the President was wrong. Yet the President had
seen convincing evidence that there were no weapons of mass destruction
when he made those statements. We must thus conclude that the President
was either *lying* or demonstrated *extremely poor judgment*.

Bill Moyers avoids that line of reasoning completely. Instead, he
focuses on the people who got things right *without* the benefit of
hindsight, and builds his incitements on the contrasts between their
actions and the actions of those who got it wrong. For example, Walcott,
Landay and Strobel from Knight Ridder did just what reporters are
supposed to do. They thought the Administration's case was a little
fishy. So they investigated, and piece by piece, they found that the
Administration's case was total malarkey. They reported the details to
the public.

Before the tanks crossed the border, every major point in the
Administration's case for the war had been publicly disproved,
discredited, or refuted. Yet somehow, the public was not aware. How did
that happen? This is the question addressed in "Buying the War."

The prevailing news narrative was that Saddam Hussein was a dangerous,
evil man, that he had weapons of mass destruction, and that he wasn't
going to back down. The investigations that ultimately discredited the
prevailing narrative did not appear all at once, or organized into an
easily digested rhetorical package. The media outlets regarded these
stories as distracting clutter, and kept them off the front pages.

The formation of a prevailing narrative isn't a unique phenomenon. This
is how the media operates. Usually, the prevailing narrative is mostly
right. This time, though, it was utterly and spectacularly wrong.

Once again, I find that it's easier to face a problem when I understand
some of its details. Even as the Media as an industry was galloping down
the wrong trail, there were many reporters doing honest, good work.
Before I had heard of Walcott, Landay and Strobel, I assumed that there
must have been a few reporters who refused to be railroaded. I found it
very comforting to see, in detail, that these reporters were not merely
hypothetical. I also found it comforting to see how much of the truth
they were able to uncover.

Some people will watch "Buying the War" and walk away with anger and
frustration. I walked away with relief. It tells me that the flaws in
our national media are bad, but at least they are *finitely* bad. It
tells me that good reporting is possible, even in the worst of political
climates. If the prevailing narrative had been more permeable to new
information, maybe we wouldn't be in this mess. The problem that
crippled America's media industry rests in the boardrooms of a few
television networks and newspaper publishers. I find that very
comforting. It no longer seems like a vague yet crippling general
malaise.

A clear statement of a problem usually points directly to its own
solution. People have blamed the crummy reporting leading up to the war
on the management of the New York Times, CNN and the broadcast networks.
Nothing much has changed as a result. This is because no one has had a
clear idea of what to blame them *for*. The managers could always throw
up their hands and say, "What could we do? How could we have known?"

Now we know: Stop trying to package the news as if it had a coherent
narrative. This is real life, not the movies.

Watch the show. If you can spare a few dollars, maybe think about
contributing to public television.
