Title: Chernobyl on the sea
Date: 2010-06-22 08:04:48
Category: general
Slug: chernobyl-sea
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: 
Summary: 


In high school, one of the fellows who lived across the dormitory hall
from me was a student from Ukraine. He was one of my school's star
students, and was supported by a well-deserved scholarship. He was very
forthright about his family's situation; I learned from him that his
father was a firefighter in the Ukraine, but that in America he had
difficulty finding meaningful work. His family moved to America so that
their son could obtain a quality education (a goal he pursued
assiduously). A few weeks before my friend graduated, I also learned
that his father had terminal cancer.

On April 23, 1986, a terrible accident happened in one of the world's
most powerful nations. A deadly combination of slapdash engineering,
inadequate safety systems, and unnecessary secrecy culminated in the
worst nuclear accident in history. The nigh shift operators of the
Chernobyl nuclear power plant triggered a runaway reaction in reactor
four; the power output jumped from 70 megawatts to over 30 gigawatts in
a matter of seconds. The reaction flash boiled the coolant, and the
resulting steam explosion blew the top of the reactor through the roof
of the building. The reactor core continued to operate exposed to the
open sky; the resulting inrush of air and extreme heat triggered a
graphite fire which burned for days.

My friend's father was among the first responders who put out the
graphite fire. The radiation was so intense that their radiometers
failed to give accurate readings, and they proceeded anyway. The reactor
began to burn through the floor of the reactor hall, and threatened to
ignite a second steam explosion if it fell into the pool of radioactive
sludge that had poured in the basement of the reactor hall. This second
steam explosion would have been far worse than the first, potentially
threatening the whole of Ukraine and its neighbors. Two workers donned
wet suits and swam into the basement, under the burning reactor core, to
open the gates that would drain the basement. On the way, their
flashlights failed, and they proceeded in darkness. The pool was
drained, and a second steam explosion was prevented. Before he perished,
one man remarked that he could feel the radiation on his hands and face
"like pins and needles."

![*A teddy bear, left behind in Pripyat. Photo by [Pedro Moura
Pinheiro](http://www.flickr.com/photos/pedromourapinheiro/2281509784/).*] (http://vort.org/media/images/red_bear.jpg)
 
Many of the people who died in the effort to contain the Chernobyl
disaster perished as a result of the Soviet government's unwillingness
to warn them of the dangers they faced. In the television footage shot
from helicopters, the video is marred by the scintillation of particles
that bombarded the camera (and the camera crews). Basic precautions like
air filters and bottled drinking water were not required. The Soviet
government did not even acknowledge the accident to the world until the
cloud of radioactive filth was detected by technicians at a Swedish
nuclear power plant. With the final body count still unfinished, one
thing is clear: It was the lack of preparation and the embarrassment of
the Soviet leadership that claimed the most victims.

About 600,000 men and women directly participated in the cleanup of the
Chernobyl disaster. Due to poor recored keeping, official misconduct,
and the inherent difficulty of establishing cause of a given cancer, it
is difficult to know how many people died as a result of the Chernobyl
disaster. The World Health Organization attributes about 50 deaths
directly to the accident. Two operators died in the explosion, and 28
people died within a few weeks after exposure. It is estimated that
about 100,000
[Liquidators](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquidator_(Chernobyl)) --
the men and women who secured the site against further contamination --
are now dead. Of course, it is very hard to know exactly how many would
be alive without the accident, but the number is likely a substantial
fraction.

I was lucky enough to meet my friend's father at my high school
graduation. A few short days after I shook the man's hand, he succumbed
to cancer.

After the accident, the Soviet government created the Chernobyl
Exclusion Zone, a 3000 square kilometer special administrative district
centered around the reactor. All civilians were evacuated from within
the Zone, leaving behind their towns and villages, and the city of
Pripyat. It was a devastating sacrifice.

It was widely expected that the Exclusion Zone would become a
radioactive wasteland, but things have not turned out that way. Instead,
the Exclusion Zone has instead become a flourishing wildlife preserve
despite the radiation, effectively the largest wilderness preserve in
Europe. There is some controversy over the precise impact of the
radiation on wildlife, but it is clear enough from the robustly growing
populations of apex predators -- wolves, foxes and lynx -- that
ecosystem is relatively healthy.

How could this be? In equilibrium conditions, populations of are limited
by the food supply. It is typically the case that the reproduction rate
of a species exceeds replacement rate. Under normal conditions, many
individuals do not survive to adulthood for lack of food. Some juveniles
may be killed by disease, accident, predation or genetic defect, but
starvation is principle and ubiquitous killer.

Radiation kills or sterilizes individuals at random. As long as the
increase in the death rate falls within the margin spanning the
difference between reproductive potential and replacement rate, there
will be no change in the population size. For every individual killed by
radiation, another individual that would otherwise starve may then eat.
This is why it is an advantage for a population to maintain a high
reproduction rate even at the cost of the deaths of many juveniles; it
guarantees a stable population in the face of a variety of pressures.

This is what has been observed in the Exclusion Zone. Populations of
birds, mammals, insects and plants have rebounded and stabilized near
their preindustrial levels. The death rate among these organisms is
higher than it is outside the Exclusion Zone, but DNA damage repair
pathways has kept the death rate within the margin. This has been
possible because the base of the food supply -- mostly grasses and small
plants -- are extremely radiation tolerant.

It is a widely held hypothesis that many features of plant physiology
are adaptations to minimize cancers and germline radiation damage. For
example, the annual leafdrop of deciduous trees sheds the tissue that
has accumulated the most radiation damage from the sun (leafdrop has
other functions, but damage control is likely among them). Many plants,
particularly grasses and flowering plants, sequester radioactive
isotopes away from their germline. This is why plants are so useful for
mitigating heavy metal contamination.

And so, thanks to the fact that oak trees and clover are better at
nuclear engineering than the Soviet Union, the ecology around Chernobyl
has actually benefited. Not from the radiation of course, but from the
fact that the radiation drove away the people. Bulldozers and asphalt
are much more dangerous to an ecology than a nuclear accident.

It's weird, really. As terrified as we are of radiation, we forget that
fierce radiation has been part of the daily experience of life on Earth
for three and a half billion years. *We* fear radiation because it is
very bad for individuals, and we value the lives of individuals. Nature
is not so sentimental.

The Deepwater Horizon disaster, will not have this kind of impact. Oil
does not kill broadly or randomly. It smothers and poisons specific
parts of the ecology, especially at the base. Massive oil spills have
not been part of normal life on Earth for very long, and there is no
natural tolerance. Radiation knocks pinprick holes in a population, but
robust populations can absorb a great deal of this kind of damage. An
oil spill does not kill in this scatter-shot manner; it kills in uniform
totality. Tolerance requires *some* survivors, and this kind of acute,
smothering contamination often leaves none.

![ *The* Deepwater Horizion *burns and begins to sink.* ](http://vort.org/media/images/Deepwater_Horizon_fire.jpg)

It is very sad to see the pelicans drowning in the oil, their eggs dead
and poisoned in their oil-drenched nests. Many thousands of Americans
worked extremely hard to snatch them from the brink of extinction. We
only celebrated their removal from the Endangered Species list a few
months ago. There is probably no way to save them now, or the dozens
(hundreds?) of other species of bird endemic the region.

Nevertheless, the real ecological holocaust makes much less compelling
photography. The annihilation of the small plants, insect larvae, fish
eggs, phytoplankton, and soil microbes will have a much more profound
impact on the Gulf ecology. Populations are constrained by their food
supply, and the oil spill will *utterly destroy* the base of the food
supply. It doesn't really matter, ultimately, that the pelicans are
getting smothered. There won't be anything for them to eat for years,
and so their extinction is virtually guaranteed.

This is what we have seen in every oil spill. A similar thing happened
when the Iraqi army poured oil into the Persian Gulf. Saudi Arabia used
to have beautiful, thriving marshlands, not so different from
Louisiana's. The spill sterilized large parts of the Saudi coast. There
has been some recovery in the nineteen years since the disaster, but the
oil is still embedded in the marshland sediments, poisoning and
suffocating. It will never be the same.

In his 1969, E. O. Wilson and Daniel Simberloff [published a
study](http://www.esajournals.org/doi/abs/10.2307/1934856) in which they
created miniature mass extinctions by fumigating small mangrove islands
with methyl bromide, killing all the arthropods. They then studied how
insects and other arthropods reestablished themselves following the mass
extinction. They experimentally confirmed the prediction that as
ecosystems recover from mass extinction, they *never* return to their
initial conditions. Ecologies are highly complex, and there are many
stable states. The Gulf as we knew it is *gone forever*.

Someday, the Gulf will recover from the Deepwater Horizon disaster, but
it will never again look like it did before the spill. There is no going
back. Many species that lived in the Gulf before the disaster will be
gone, and they will be replaced by a mix of species we cannot anticipate
or control. If oil spills in Africa are any indication, we may have soon
be sharing a continent with *Plasmodium falciparum* -- Malaria.

As an ecological disaster, the Deepwater Horizon is far worse than
Chernobyl. It covers a larger area, and the damage will fall most
heavily on the base of the ecosystem. The attenuated productive capacity
at the base of the ecosystem will support far fewer individuals further
up the food chain, and there will likely be fewer niches available for
different species.

As a human disaster, it is not clear what the death toll will be. More
people died -- eleven, in total -- in the initial explosion on Deepwater
Horizon than the explosion of at Chernobyl. We are seeing a similar
pattern of incompetence, opacity and disregard for the health and safety
of the people working on the cleanup. People are [getting
sick](http://news.yahoo.com/s/ap/us_oil_spill_workers_health), and there
is [no system in
place](http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/37689831/ns/business-us_business/) to
take care of them. It's difficult to say how many people will be
sickened, but the experience of the Exxon Valdez cleanup [is not
encouraging](http://www.commondreams.org/headlines01/1105-04.htm). We
are raising our own crop of Liquidators. Let us hope we take better care
of them than that Soviet Union. Once again, the experience of those who
worked on Ground Zero after 9/11 is not encouraging.

What have we learned? From Three Mile Island, we learned that while we
can and do build safe reactors, it is probably impossible to guarantee
that *every* reactor is safe, or that every reactor is safe for every
moment of its operating lifetime. From Chernobyl, we got our first taste
of what a nuclear accident would be like. Keep in mind that the heroic
Liquidators -- people like my friend's father -- prevented a second
disaster that would have created an Exclusion Zone swallowing nearly all
of Ukraine, Belarus and parts of Poland, Germany and Sweden. Instead of
loosing Pripyat, we could have lost Kiev, Warsaw, Minsk, Budapest, and
thousands of towns and villages in between. It could have been so much
worse. We learned from Chernobyl that we cannot afford even *one* major
nuclear accident. Nuclear power is not something to be despised; it is
simply a wager we don't have the chips to back.

What lessons can be drawn from the Deepwater Horizon disaster? Just like
nuclear power, fossil fuels are a gamble -- except we've already played
this hand, and we've lost.
