Title: The Davis Crash Map
Date: 2009-04-29 00:02:45
Category: general
Slug: davis-crash-map
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: code, software, gps, maps, driving, cars, transportation, traffic, commuting, bicycle, california, transport, accident, helmet
Summary: 


I want announce a little project I put together over the weekend. For
want of a better name, I'll call it the [Davis Crash
Map](http://vort.org/media/data/crashes.html). Basically, I analyzed the
accident report spreadsheets from the City of Davis [Public Works
Department](http://cityofdavis.org/pw/), and made an overlay for Google
Maps to visualize the data. The spreadsheets are a bit difficult to
analyze, so I'm leaving out the reports that aren't clear to me (about
15% of the reports). The reports that gave me some trouble seem to be
randomly distributed over the city, so the overlay should still give an
unbiased picture of what is happening.

[![](http://vort.org/media/images/crashmap_screenshot.png)](http://vort.org/media/data/crashes.html)

In particular, this is map is intended to examine bicycle accidents. I
hope people will look at this map, and think about how they behave on
the roads, weather on foot, on a bicycle, or in a car. How you behave on
the road has direct, and sometimes dire, consequences for you and for
other people.

However, there is more to this than behavior. This is also a design
question. Roads are not natural features. They are designed and built by
people for use by people. As with anything that is made by humans, there
are good designs and bad designs. These designs have a real impact on
peoples' lives. In the case of streets, the impact on your life can be
very literal, as this map shows.

Even good designs can always be improved. Davis is a pretty safe town in
which to walk, bicycle and drive. But if you study this map, and think
about it as you go about the town, it's also clear that things could be
better.

I'm not a traffic engineer, or a civil engineer, or a city planner. I
claim no expertise in those areas. I'll leave it to other people to make
specific suggestions. However, I think it is important for the users of
streets -- pretty much everybody -- to think about what kind of streets
they want. This map should help give you a better idea of what kind of
streets we actually *have*.

For some reason, people seem to get very emotional about traffic. I grew
up in Los Angeles, home of the nation's worst traffic jams. Perhaps this
is to make up for our lack of a professional football franchise.
Passions about transportation, especially mundane things like parking
spaces and HOV lanes, get people really worked up. Los Angeles is also
famous for road rage, and nowhere is it in greater evidence than in the
corridors of City Hall. Public meetings on traffic can make I-405 look
like afternoon tea. In fact, thousands of people from all over the world
tune into the internet broadcast of the Santa Monica city council
meetings to listen to Californians scream at each other over the exact
position of little blobs of paint on little strips of asphalt.

What the conversation needs, I think, is some perspective. Data can help
provide that perspective, especially if it can be represented in a way
that is easy to understand. Maps are good at that.

If you will indulge me, I'd like to share my perspective on this data.
Each marker represents a traumatic event for someone. Under some of
those markers, a life came to a sudden, violent end. I'd like to share a
picture of what kind of event a marker on this map represents. You won't
find a marker for this event because it happened in Norman, Oklahoma, a
college town that is a lot like Davis.

![_Anna and me_](http://vort.org/media/images/anna_and_me.jpg)

[In October of 2007](http://vort.org/2007/10/31/protect-your-noodle/),
my little sister was riding her bicycle near her house. A lady in a
Mercedes made a lazy left turn, and crossed onto the wrong side of the
road. She hit Anna head-on. Anna went up and over the hood of the car,
and face-planted on the windshield, breaking her nose and her front
teeth. The lady slammed on the breaks, and Anna then went flying off the
car and slammed her head on the pavement. That much is clear from where
my mother photographed the tire marks, the blood stains, and scattered
teeth.

![ *Who designed this street, anyway?* ](http://vort.org/media/images/anna_accident.jpg)

The sequence of events afterward are a little unclear, since Anna does
not remember anything from that day, or for several days before and
after the accident. The police report includes several details that are
impossible or don't make any sense; for example, the officer thought she
was coming out of a driveway onto the street, but the driveway did not
belong to anyone she knew, and was paved in gravel (extremely annoying
to bicycle on). The report also places the accident on the wrong side of
the street, which was obvious enough based on the tire marks and blood.
Based on what her friends say she was doing -- biking from her house to
a friend's house -- she would have just been pedaling along the side of
the road. The details of what happened are somewhat unclear, other than
the evidence left on the road and gouged onto my sister's face.

After hitting the pavement, she evidently got up and staggered around
for a bit, and then collapsed. She stopped breathing, and officer on the
scene couldn't find a pulse, and assumed that she was dead. This was the
reason given for not immediately summoning an ambulance.

Then she suddenly revived and started mumbling. The lady who ran her
down went into screaming hysterics, and had to be restrained (or
evacuated, or something). It was only *then* that an ambulance was
called. From the report, it appears that paramedics and police spent a
good deal of time tending to the driver of the car, who was having an
anxiety attack, instead of Anna, who was bleeding from massive head
trauma.

Anna then spent the next several days in the hospital. My mother got on
the next flight to stay with her. For the next several days, Anna went
through long and short memory lapses and dizzy spells of various
lengths. When I spoke to her on the phone over the next several days,
she also had some kind of aphasia, which was very jarring to me because
she is normally a very articulate person. And then there was the puking.
Brain injuries often come with a heavy dose of overpowering nausea. She
was on anti-nausea drugs for a long time after the accident.

It took a long time for he to start feeling "normal" again. Almost two
years later, she's still not sure she feels completely normal.
Fortunately, thanks to some really great work by her surgeons, she looks
normal. Needless to say, she is both very lucky and very tough.

![ *Anna's bicycle. The police kept it as evidence, but allowed my mother
to photograph it.*](http://vort.org/media/images/annas_bike.jpg)

You could say that I have a personal stake in this, and I will not claim
to be unbiased. Many people who argue against safety measures that would
slow traffic argue their case on the basis of personal responsibility.
We are each responsible for our actions, they argue, and if you do
something stupid, you are responsible for the consequences. Why should
people who don't do stupid things be inconvenienced?

I agree completely. However, if one casts any real issue into the frame
of personal responsibility, then things are rarely so simple. Everyone
who *could* act in a situation has responsibilities, even if they are
not they are directly involved. When you have the power to prevent
something bad from happening, and you choose not to act, then some of
the responsibility falls on you. Every unfortunate, stupid thing that
happens involves a cast of thousands of silent, [but not
blameless](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bystander_effect), bystanders.

We have a responsibility to at least attempt to protect people
regardless of what they are doing -- even if it is stupid. This is
*especially* true when it comes to the things we build. We shouldn't, if
we can possibly avoid it, build things that injure and kill people. If
we can think of ways to make something we build less dangerous, we ought
to give it a try.

![*Anna and Earnie, about a year after the accident.*](http://vort.org/media/images/anna_and_cat.jpg)
 
My little sister was stupid not to wear a helmet that day. The lady in
the car was stupid not to have been on the lookout for cyclists. *But
neither of them deserved what happened*. Each of them is obviously bears
some measure of responsiblity (and I have my own opinions on how those
measures are apportioned), but the city of Norman is also responsible.
The city didn't even bother to paint a line down the middle of the road;
what was the driver supposed to be on the wrong side of?

Yes, this is about personal responsibility. We, the public, build the
roads. We are responsible for the markers on this map, and all the
terror, trauma and tragedy they represent. Let's try to do better.
