Title: eBook reader
Date: 2007-06-01 06:57:11
Category: general
Slug: ebook-reader
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: ebook, hardware, computing
Summary: 


I had a chance to play with Sony's eBook reader (a.k.a. the PRS-500) at
Borders Books today. I was surprisingly pleased with it. It is a
comfortable size and shape for reading prose, and the device is thin but
not flimsy. If I read a lot of fiction for a living, I would buy one of
these devices immediately.

The transition when you "flip" the page produces a very strange visual
effect. Imagine you are looking at a page of text, and then someone
spills a few blobs of ink on the page. The ink spreads out and covers
most of the page, and then fades to reveal the next page. It takes about
a second. After you press the next-page button, there is a one second
delay before the computer wakes up and starts the re-draw process. So,
it's about two seconds to flip the page. It's no slower than it takes to
flip a page on an ordinary book, so I don't think it's a drawback.

Also, the screen does not look at all like paper. It looks like a
light-gray plastic card printed with darkish-gray text with a matte
finish. Although it doesn't have the look-and-feel of paper, the
readability is just as good. Or, at least its as good as a paper printed
with same color scheme. It's very similar to newsprint.

If I were going to use an eBook reader extensively, I would probably
need more than one. The size of the screen is good for reading prose,
but it is not appropriate for many other kinds of reading. Newspapers,
textbooks and scientific papers really need a larger display area. These
works are not meant to be digested linearly; the reader is encouraged to
wander among the main body of prose, figures, tables, equations, and
their respective captions. You need a display area at least as big as US
Letter (8.5" x 11") or A4 (210mm x 297mm), and probably bigger. I would
really need a 6" x 9" reader for casual reading and a 18" x 27" reader
for serious work.

It would also be of great utility to be able to write on these devices.
I can live without handwriting recognition, as long as there is a
convenient way of filing and organizing my scribbles.

The eBook Reader is the first Sony product that has tempted me since I
declared my Sony Moratorium. Nevertheless, at \$350, plus overpriced DRM
infested books, it's way outside my budget for this sort of thing.
