Title: Florence Alice Itkin 1920-2009
Date: 2009-03-05 21:09:00
Category: general
Slug: florence-alice-itkin-1920-2009
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: life, family
Summary: 


Florence Itken, my great aunt, passed away yesterday. I was always very
close with her growing up, and I lived with her for a year after I
graduated from college. She was a great friend and teacher.

Flo was a teacher, in fact, from the time she was a little girl until
the moment she slipped away yesterday. I thought I might share a few
words about this great passion of hers.

Just as the Great Depression struck its most demoralizing chords, her
father Solomon passed away, leaving the family to live off of my great
grandmother's meager income as sweatshop worker. Like many
first-generation Americans, Flo provided a lot of practical support for
her mother, and helped her two sisters with their schoolwork. Flo was
twelve, my grandmother Vivian was nine and my other aunt Selma was five.
Florence spent her teenage years watching over her sisters's schoolwork
and helping her mother.

Anna had missed the opportunity for formal education, and so my great
grandmother was determined that her daughters would receive the best
education possible. She had grown up in a rabbinical household in what
is now Belarus, but she left for America (alone) as a young teenager.
Later in life, she was an avid reader in English, Yiddish, Russian, and
a bit of German and Hebrew. But until the Depression and the war were
over, and her daughters safely making their way in life, all of that was
on hold. Anna's hopes for her daughters' future depended on public
education. Sight unseen, she placed those hopes on the University of
California.

Whenever I think of their journey from New York to Los Angeles, I always
think of Steinbeck's *Grapes of Wrath*, and imagine the surviving Itkens
making their way among the bedraggled columns of Americans on the long
road to California (though, I cannot imagine them tolerating any
*literal* bedragglement). The fictional Joads fleeing the Dust Bowl for
greener pastures of the California Central Valley, the actual Itkins
fleeing the tenements of the Lower East Side for the sanctuary
California classrooms. Fortunately, things turned out much better for
the Itkins than the Joads.

All three of the Itkin girls went to UCLA, and all three of them became
teachers. Florence became a colleague and friend of the great educator
Corinne A. Seeds, for whom UCLA's Lab School is named. To give you an
idea of the company Flo kept, you can read about Ms. Seeds (Flo always
called her Ms. Seeds, even though they were close friends) in
[*Pedagogies of Resistance: Women Educator Activists,
1880-1960*](http://www.amazon.com/Pedagogies-Resistance-Educator-Activists-1880-1960/dp/0807762970),
or if you're near Tufts, you can look up Professsor Kathleen Weiler, who
is writing a biography of Ms. Seeds.

Barely out of college, Flo was one of the few people who publicly
supported Ms. Seeds' opposition to the internment of Japanese Americans
during World War II (for which both of them received death threats).
Along with Ms. Seeds and others, my aunt was one of the shock troops of
John Dewey's progressive movement. It is because of them that primary
eduction is actually *educational*.

Flo was the principal of Kenter Canyon Elementary for, I think, about
forty years. During her tenure at Kenter Canyon Elementary, it was the
top-performing elementary school in the LA Unified School District. This
was in no small part because Flo was an excellent teacher herself, and
because she acted as a human firewall between her staff and "the
conniving bureaucrats downtown," "the pencil pushers" and "the idiot
school board." She retired on May 31st, 1980. Flo has teased me for my
whole life on account of the fact that I caused my mother to miss her
retirement party by arriving in the world on that particular day.

When I saw her on Saturday, she used what little energy she had to ask
me three questions: How is school? When is Mimi graduating? Tell me what
you've learned. Those were her last words to me, save three. To
understand those three, I'll have to make a little diversion.

For Flo, politics was an integral part of being a teacher. She believed
that a good teacher should fight for her students, and should not be shy
about carrying the fight wherever it had to go. The task of an educator
is to create opportunities for her students. That means that an educator
is called upon to confront prejudice and ignorance when they threaten
those opportunities. Flo believed that smashing social barriers was just
as important as multiplication tables (although, this was not a simple
distinction to her, since one can smash social barriers *by* teaching
multiplication tables, depending on who was doing the teaching and who
was doing the learning).

Of course, she didn't clutter up her classroom with politics. Education
is a science, and she was a serious practitioner. Her politics was about
clearing the road ahead of her students.

It came as a huge shock to me that her views were so forceful. She was
the very model of an elementary school principal -- proper, patient, and
professional. She was the sort of lady that hippies feared; she would
have told them to wash up, given them The Look and used The Voice, and
made them feel very foolish.

Flo kept her radicalism under tight control, unleashing it in calculated
measures. The people who saw her act on those principles never knew what
hit them. She only brought out the knives in board meetings and budget
committees. Most of the time I knew her, she seemed like a funny, sweet
old lady. But when Her Children (or students generally) were threatened,
the sweet old lady was suddenly made of steel. She would, and did, go to
war for her pupils and for her teaching staff. I suspect that her first
objection to Japanese internment was that it took students out of their
classrooms, and death threats weren't going to stop her from raising
hell about it.

I was with Flo through the 2004 election, and she was devastated. George
Bush was, in her view, a teacher's worst nightmare. He was a great
propagator of ignorance, advocate of prejudice, a spoiled, dull child of
a rich politician, *and* a conniving bureaucrat. Flo described the
mandatory testing in the No Child Left Behind Act as "a bunch of
skull-measuring" and "a jobs program for bad administrators."

A few days after Kerry lost, I was having breakfast with Flo and talking
about the election. Flo waived at the double fistfull of pills she was
trying to swallow and said, "Damn him, now I'm going to have to do this
for another four years." Like all of Flo's Pronouncements, it was
accomplished. She weathered four years of Parkinson's disease, heart
failure, blindness, broken bones and (most painfully) the dismal news of
the last four years so that she could deliver her vote for the sake of
her students.

I asked her what she thinks of our new president. She gasped, and gave
me the thumbs up. "I'm so proud," she said, speaking, I know, as a
teacher.

Florence loved flowers, but if you really want to honor her memory,
please do so by supporting teachers.
