Title: Fun with My Tracks, an accident, and Biking in Davis
Date: 2009-04-21 05:40:54
Category: general
Slug: fun-my-tracks-accident-and-biking-davis
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: stupidity, gps, navigation, maps, driving, cars, transportation, traffic, suvs, bicycle, california, transport, accident, davis
Summary: 


I was biking home today, and I decided to take a detour to enjoy the
warm evening (and to avoid the not enjoyable warm apartment). About half
way around the [Davis Bike Loop](http://daviswiki.org/Davis_Bike_Loop),
I remembered that I wanted to try out [My
Tracks](http://mytracks.appspot.com/). Here's the result :

![](http://vort.org/media/images/bikeride_davis_1.png)

Neat!

After wandering off the Bike Loop a bit, I decided to head home. I was
biking down Russell Blvd., and I witnessed a very scary car accident.
The accident happened where I stopped recording the track, at the red
marker. A guy in a cherried-out lifted F-150 was sitting at the traffic
light (that's the point where I turned around). When the light turned
green, he floored it. According to the other witnesses, he was racing
with someone, or trying to catch someone who had cut him off. I couldn't
see the other car because it was behind his gigantic stupid truck.

What I did see, though, was that he accelerated continuously until he
reached the next intersection (the red marker), where he had a head-on
collision with a girl in a 1990's Honda Civic trying to make a left
turn. His engine was deafeningly loud even a block away, and I heard it
roaring and down-shifting right up until the crash.

Looking at the damage to her car, it looked like he basically ran it
over. The lift kit on the truck put his undercarriage about level with
her roof, and there were even little ladders installed to climb up to
the doors. After he ran over the Civic, he swerved around a bit, jumped
the median, sideswiped a small SUV in the oncoming traffic, spun 180
degrees, and snapped his axle. When the axle snapped, I heard his engine
redline for half a second and then cut.

Happily, nobody was hurt. The girl in the Civic was pretty much
petrified, though. She was convinced that the accident was her fault
because she didn't get out of the way.

I told her this was nonsense; the truck was going more than double the
speed limit, and I'm pretty sure he didn't have his lights on (it was
dusk, but not completely dark yet). She asked me about five times, "How
much do you think it will cost to fix?" I told her, "Cost *you*?
Nothing. He was committing maybe a dozen moving violations, and probably
racing someone. His insurance company will probably be so happy not to
have to pay medical bills that they will buy you a whole new car."

Maybe she could have been a little swifter completing her turn, but it's
a busy street and there is a lot of pedestrian and bicycle traffic (it
parallels a bike path). Making a quick turn is probably not a good idea.
Or, maybe she could have waited until this asshole passed, but, as I
pointed out, he was going maybe 50 or 60 in a 30 zone, and accelerating.
She timed her turn right for reasonable traffic flow, but didn't account
for total maniacs among the oncoming traffic. It would have been
difficult to judge when he would reach the intersection she was turning
through.

Oi!

As it turns out, Davis has been [thinking about redesigning this stretch
of Russell Blvd. for several
years](%0Ahttp://www.davisbicycles.org/projects/5thstreet/). If you look
at the proposed design, it would have made this accident impossible or
unlikely. You can't race on a one lane road, and a landscaped medium
would have prevented the second collision.
