Title: Garage Sale
Date: 2007-09-01 22:48:27
Category: general
Slug: garage-sale
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: life
Summary: 


I've got too much crap. I want to sell some of it. If you see anything
you like, email me!

I have [posted a Flickr gallery of all the stuff I'm
selling](http://www.flickr.com/photos/rneches/sets/72157601777088340/%0A).

### Vintage WiFi Station -- \$15

This is a commercial-grade Nokia 802.11 access point. Yes, 802.11, not
that fancy Johnny-come-Lately 802.11b or that bling-bling 802.11g. The
original.

![](http://farm2.static.flickr.com/1053/1283657592_62e607342b.jpg?v=0)

It runs at a stately 2 MB/s, with none of this rushing around at manic
11 MB/s speeds or barbaric 54 MB/s speeds. It has a removable Bay
Networks BayStack 660 PCMCIA card, which I presume can be replaced with
something more modern if you want to spoil the experience. And it is an
experience, let me tell you. I've done no fewer than six Debian
installations over this wonderful example of Scandinavian craftsmanship.

Lest you think this device is obsolete, I should point out that it works
just fine with newer WiFi cards. Also, ask youself this: How fast is
your internet connection, really? Is it faster than 2 MB/s? Probably
not. Probably, you pay for 768 KB/s downlink, and you actually get 480
KB/s. You aren't fooling anyone with that fancy 54 MB/s 802.11g access
point (that only actually runs that fast when you put your laptop
directly on top of it, anyway). Your bits aren't moving any faster that
your ISP says they will.

It's WiFi from a more *civilized* age.

### Laser Level -- \$25

Bulldog laser level, complete with tripod, carrying case, and
eye-protection. Yours for \$25.

![](http://farm2.static.flickr.com/1035/1282912807_8df89f7402.jpg?v=0)

### Intel Centrino mini-PCI WiFi card -- \$30

This was the original card that came with my IBM ThinkPad X40. I wanted
an Atheros-based card, so I bought one and replaced the Centrino card.
It's been sitting in its little anti-static bag since ever since.

![](http://farm2.static.flickr.com/1034/1283730254_59f85918a4.jpg?v=0)
