Title: SimEarth: F.U.D. Inoculation
Date: 2007-02-02 17:35:39
Category: general
Slug: global-warming
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: science, energy, education 
Summary: 


Growing up, I had a lot of committed, honest and intelligent science
teachers, but somehow, there were always a few lessons that just
seemed... off. For example, in fifth grade, our textbook flatly stated
that we had *no idea* what caused the extinction of the dinosaurs. The
teacher, who didn't have any other source to fall back on, taught the
book.

This seemed almost offensive to me. I was eleven or twelve years old, so
not very much time had passed since my *Dinosaurs are Awesome!* phase. I
knew that palaeontologists had a pretty good idea of what killed the
dinosaurs. Like any recovering dinosaur-enthusiast, I knew about the
[K-T
boundary](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cretaceous-Tertiary_extinction_event)
and its abundance of rare isotopes of iridium and chromium. It seemed
like pretty solid evidence to me; an asteroid impact had caused the mass
extinction. The big question was whether or not the Chicxulub crater was
the site of the impact. Our textbook's claim that scientists have "no
idea" what killed the dinosaurs was very unsettling. The fact that no
one really seemed to care about the misleading characterization of the
topic was disturbing.

In freshman year biology class, we began our discussion of genetics by
examining the inheritance patterns of various genetic diseases. To my
horror, several students repeatedly expressed the opinion that the world
would be better if we simply sterilized or exterminated everyone with,
for example, cystic fibrosis. Then we wouldn't have to worry about it
any more. The teacher was appalled. By the time evolution came around, I
was was resigned to the necessity of ignoring everything my classmates
had to say.

Then there was global warming. In my elementary school science classes,
we learned that carbon dioxide and water vapor are greenhouse gases. We
learned that both gases are emitted by combustion. We also learned that
fossil fuels are the decomposed remains of dead plants and animals. We
learned about the global carbon cycle. And yet, the question of whether
or not humans could cause global warming was considered "dubious."

In high school, virtually no one thought humans could cause global
warming. When I competed on our policy debate team, judges would often
throw out your whole case if you impact scenario involved global
warming. We were coached to avoid the topic. If our opponents raised the
issue, we were given canned arguments designed to undermine the whole
idea of global warming. The canned arguments didn't attempt to prove or
disprove anything; they merely created doubt and confusion about the
issue. I seem to recall that our teams used a popular
anti-global-warming brief from Baylor University, though I can't find a
reference to it. They were devastatingly effective. Later on, I noticed
that same arguments turned up in newspaper editorials and political
messages.

Nevertheless, it always seemed so *obvious* to me that global warming
was a real threat, and that the burning of fossil fuels was the most
likely cause. I recently began to wonder why it was that I remained
convinced of its dangers despite spending a decade of my formative years
among a *consensus* of global-warming naysayers. Why was I so convinced?

Obviously, I hadn't read the scientific literature and I hadn't
conducted studies myself. Whatever convinced me, it wasn't exactly
careful evaluation of the evidence. I suppose it must have been the
hours and hours I spent playing my favorite video game.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/Simearth.JPG)

SimEarth is a toy model, and the real feedback systems in the
environment are vastly more complicated. Global warming in SimEarth was
a fairly simple effect. However, tinkering with the simulation did give
me an intuitive appreciation for the complexity of interdependent
systems. The Earth is vastly more complicated that even the most
sophisticated computer simulations. SimEarth teaches an exceedingly
important lesson: When you disturb a complex nonlinear system, there are
*always* consequences. Even when you understand every single rule
governing a system, you often cannot predict the outcome.

If you don't believe me, fire up SimEarth, and try to guide a
civilization of intelligent amphibians to the stars.
