Title: Goodby, OS X
Date: 2006-10-25 22:37:42
Category: general
Slug: goodby-os-x
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: computers, rage, apple
Summary: 


I finally broke down and installed Ubuntu Edgy Eft on my iMac at work,
and I can't believe I didn't do it sooner. There are a lot of things to
like about OS X, but for my personal taste, there is just so much *more*
to like about Ubuntu. It's snappier and it does more of what I want and
less of what I don't.

The biggest plus so far has been the ability to simply copy things off
of my iPod and into my music library just by dragging them. This is
something that iTunes was designed to prevent you from doing. Rhythmbox
just does what you'd expect. So, it has finally happened; Rhythmbox is
now better than iTunes.

Not that this has very much to do with Rhythmbox, mind you. It's just
that Apple's latest iTunes, released into the world in much the same way
as a turd, is so magnificently hideous that I can hardly stand looking
at it. Not only is it a turd floating in the swimming pool of great
Apple applications, but it actively *prevents* me from doing simple,
obvious and useful things. Keep my music files on the hard drive of a
computer with a 1000base-T connection directly to MAE-WEST? No problem!
Allow me to move my files from one computer to another by hand-carrying
them on my aged iPod? No, that would promote *piracy*!

And then, there was the issue with my iPod Shuffle. iTunes has this
thing where it sort of gloms onto your Shuffle, urinates all over its
poor little filesystem, and tells all the other Macs that might
encounter it that, "This is my Shuffle! You can't put any music here!"
So, my sister copied some of her new music (yes, actually hers, as in
she is the artist) onto my Shuffle. Her iTunes claimed my Shuffle. When
I want to put any other music on it, it will insist on deleting
everything she put on there. I can't copy her music into my library,
because that would be *naughty*.

There are an assortment of tools and tricks that one can use to defeat
these "features" of iTunes, but that just seems stupid. Anything that
requires a work-around is, in my opinion, a bug. So, despite crashing
all the time, Rhythmbox actually has fewer serious usability bugs than
iTunes.

My only compliant for Ubuntu is that they need to detect the right
modules to load to keep Apple's Gigantic Fans of Doom from levitating
the computer from my desk. Evidently, loading the very well named
windfarm\_cpufreq\_clamp makes everything happy.

Other than that, my only complaint goes to Apple for putting a crappy
nVidia chip in this thing, and to nVidia, for their stupid closed-source
drivers.
