Title: I don't care what you say, it's a planet
Date: 2006-08-24 18:10:31
Category: general
Slug: i-dont-care-what-you-say-its-a-planet
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: 
Summary: 


![](http://vort.org/media/images/Pluto.jpg) [Demoting
Pluto](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2006_redefinition_of_planet) from
"planet" to a "dwarf planet" has got to be one of the dumbest things to
happen in science this year. It seems that astronomers will not rest
until they have classified every object the see as a dwarf-something.
For example, all main-sequence stars, including our own sun, are [dwarf
stars](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dwarf_star). This is in *addition*
to other silly conventions, like calling all elements heavier than
helium "metals."

I think science is afflicted by a naming-mania. Maybe this is a side
effect of biology envy. Biology has names for millions of things;
millions of species, hundreds (or maybe thousands) of organs, millions
of molecules, and maybe tens of millions of processes. Astronomy, on the
other hand, really only has a few clearly distinct objects; rocks, blobs
of (somewhat) ionized gas, stars, star corpses, big blobs of stars, big
blobs of blobs of stars, and Other. Which particular rocks we call
"planets" is an essentially arbitrary choice. At parties, biologists
pontificate at length about the *peptide sequence* of *Glycine reuptake
receptors* they found in the *presynaptic ganglia* located in the
*deutocerebrum* of the latest and most fashionable breed of *knock-out
Drosophila melanogaster*, and astronomers are forced to string together
ordinary words to describe how gas falls onto the surface of a white
dwarf. Maybe they feel inadequate that their jargon isn't rich enough,
and so they are racing to catch up with biology. Someone ought to slap
some sense into them.

Let us meditate on this problem for a moment. Right now, the Moon is a
moon. However, it is slowly drifting away from Earth, and will someday
escape and begin orbiting the Sun. Then it will "become" a planet. Or,
by the time it happens, astronomers would classify it as an
under-sub-sub-mini-sub-micro-dwarf planet. But it didn't really "become"
anything. It just followed a trajectory. So why change the name? It
would really be much neater, and more honest, to adopt a naming
convention that recognizes that when we name things that lie on a
continuous scale, we make essentially arbitrary demarcations. Take a
group of objects that includes rocky things the size of my left upper
molar, the size of Manhattan, the size of Madagascar, and the size of
Mars. Which things we call "planets" and which things we call "debris"
is simply a matter carving up the universe into bins that are convenient
for our little anthrocentric minds.

I think someone ought to sue for an injunction against the use of the
term "dwarf planet" until an investigation has been conducted to
determine how much money the members of the International Astronomical
Union will make from the new editions of fifth-grade science textbooks
that will surely be required if this change is permitted.

Anyway, in all seriousness. Fine, maybe Pluto formed by a different
process. What happens if we fine a "dwarf planet" that formed the same
way as pluto, but happens to be bigger than some *actual* planets? The
"dwarf" thing seems pretty ill-advised.
