Title: Kamchatka for those who've never played Risk
Date: 2010-07-27 13:30:25
Category: general
Slug: kamchatka-those-whove-never-played-risk
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: science, grad, school, kamchatka, thermophiles, russia, eisenlab, metagenomics, research
Summary: 


[![](http://vort.org/media/images/risk_kamchatka.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/stewf/270942458/)

Anyone who's played *[Risk](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Risk_(game))*
will probably remember Kamchatka as "That place you can attack Alaska
from." Like most of the territories in *Risk*, Kamchatka of the Hasbro
game doesn't exactly match its modern political boundaries :

![](http://vort.org/media/images/map_of_russia_kamchatka.png)

However, the *Risk* territory does reflect the range of the
[Chukotko-Kamchatkan language
family](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chukotko-Kamchatkan_languages),
which includes the language spoken by the
[Koryaks](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Koryaks) (Kamchatka's indigenous
people) :

![](http://vort.org/media/images/Chukotko-Kamchatkan_map.png)

400,000 people live on the peninsula, and about 13,000 are Koryak (about
3%). For comparison, Alaska has about 686,000 people, of which roughly
100,000 (15%) are native peoples. In terms of population, the Koryaks'
situation more closely resembles that of the
[Ainu](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ainu_people) of
[Hokkaido](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hokkaid%C5%8D) (also about 3% of
the population, going by self-identification) than native Alaskans.

Kamchatka has volcanoes. Lots and [lots of
volcanoes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volcanoes_of_Kamchatka). It's
part of the [Ring of
Fire](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pacific_Ring_of_Fire), with 160
volcanoes, 29 of which are active. The whole area is seismically active,
and there was a [decent-size
quake](http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/recenteqsww/Quakes/us2010zda4.php)
off the coast just this Sunday.

Phil Plait at [Bad
Astronomy](http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/badastronomy) posted about
an this awesome photo of [two Kamchatkan volcanoes erupting at the same
time](http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/badastronomy/2010/02/19/volcano-on-volcano-action/).
It was captured in February, 2010 by NASA's [TERRA Earth-observing
satellite](http://terra.nasa.gov) as it flew over (the TERRA website
appears to be down right now - this isn't rocket science, NASA!).

![](http://vort.org/media/images/nasa_twin_volcanos.jpg)

These volcanoes, and the microbes that live in and around them, are the
reason why we're traveling around the world to see this place. Wherever
magma is close enough to the surface to interact with groundwater,
superheated steam can be forced toward the surface. Depending on the how
much it cools before reaching the surface and the pressure under which
it emerges, the liquid can for a variety of hydrothermal features;
geysers, fumaroles and springs if the liquid emerges on land, and [black
smokers and white
smokers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_smoker#Black_smokers_and_white_smokers)
if it emerges under water.

Along the way, the water dissolves various minerals and gases from the
rock, and catalyzes the formation of new minerals and gases. By the time
it emerges at the surface, it has become a complex suspension of
minerals, gases and liquids, some dissolved, others suspended as a
colloid, and others in bubbles and grains. I'm going to stop calling it
"water" and call this stuff "volcanic liquid."

The chemistry of the emerging liquid depends on the chemistry,
temperature, depth, thickness, packing and order of each layer of rock
and soil it transits on the way to the surface, as well as the pressure
and temperature of the liquid at each step along its journey.

[![A thermal pool at Lassen Volcanic National Park*
](http://vort.org/media/images/lassen_bubbling.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/rneches/3901272559/in/set-72157622314189756/)


My favorite way to explain how there could be so much variety in
volcanic liquids is to think about coffee. It's possible to make several
very different kinds of coffee from the same beans. If you grind them
very fine, pack them tightly, and force steam through the grounds at
high pressure, you get espresso. If you grind them even finer and
suspend them in hot water as a colloid, you get Turkish coffee. If you
grind them coarsely, suspend them in water, and remove them with a
sieve, you get French-style coffee. If you grind them moderately, put
them in a filter cone, and pour hot water through them, you get
American-style drip coffee. They each taste totally different, despite
being made from exactly the same ingredients.

Now, instead of coffee grounds, imagine many layers of rock, each with
different chemistry, packing density, and thickness. Rocks, by the way,
are pretty complicated things, and can be made out of [almost
anything](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geochemistry). Practically every
source of volcanic liquid from around the world has a unique chemical
composition.

This variety is one of the reasons microbiologists are so interested in
the organisms that live in these liquids. Organisms that live in the
Earth's atmosphere, like you and me, have only a few attractive options
for how we run our metabolisms. For organisms that live in volcanic
liquids, every combination of dissolved and suspended minerals and gases
offers its own unique metabolic opportunities. Volcanic structures tend
to persist for a long time, and so their denizens have time to evolve
very well-adapted strategies for living in these places.

Visiting these volcanic vents is like taking a trip to an alien world,
or like visiting Earth when it was a radically different planet.
Volcanic zones don't just look alien, they *are* alien!

[![An alien habitat at Lassen Volcanic National Park](http://vort.org/media/images/lassen_weird_pool.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/rneches/3901277339/in/set-72157622314189756/)

I will be spending almost two weeks up-close-and-personal with some of
these alien habitats, so there will be more to come.
