Title: Last minute preparations
Date: 2010-08-04 05:10:44
Category: general
Slug: last-minute-preparations
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: science, food, grad, school, genome, gene, kamchatka, thermophiles, russia, eisenlab, metagenomics, research
Summary: 


We're planning to return from Uzon on the 11th of August, so assuming we
leave this evening, we'll be there for seven days. We have to plan for
the possibility that we might get fogged in up there, so we might be
stuck for a few extra days. Hopefully that won't happen, because we've
got a workshop to prepare for once we get back. Also, I've picked up a
bad habit from [Jonathan](http://phylogenomics.blogspot.com/), and I
still have to write my talk for the 17th.

We had an *exhausting* day yesterday.

First, the cost of the helicopter has gone up since last time they made
the trip, so Frank and Albert had to arrange to transfer the difference
from America to Petropavlovsk. This turned out to be an *agonizing*
process, and I'm not even sure of all the details. Albert came back to
the apartment after the first day of working on it and passed out
instantly. Suffice it to say that both of them have extremely patient
and resourceful spouses, without whom we would now be stranded in town
with no way to get to our research site.

There remains a great deal of confusion and uncertainty about the status
of the generator (or generators?) at Uzon, and so we've had to prepare
for the worst. I spent the day with Albert and Alex hunting down motor
oil, spark plugs, and two-stroke oil (in case it's a two-stroke engine),
and other small-engine stuff. Supposedly there is a new American-market
Honda generator up there, a Soviet-era machine that can still be
persuaded to work, and perhaps something else of unknown providence and
status. We were also told that there was no generator at all, sending us
scrambling all over town to buy a new generator, but that was evidently
a misscommunication. Fortunately we got it straightened out before we
actually started laying out Rubles for the first generator we could
carry away!

In the summertime, the research station would be a truly ideal place for
an off-grid solar array. One of the things I'm going to do while I'm
there is to study the structure an write up a proposal for its owners to
install one, if they should so desire.

After much looking around I found that, nobody sells regular [fuel
canisters](http://www.snowpeak.com/stoves/backpacking.html?fuel_type=57)
for backpacking stoves in this part of Russia. However, they do sell
adapters that let you plug them into butane refill canisters. The
canisters are very cheap, but they are shaped like cans of hairspray;
narrow and tall. Not a very stable platform for cooking! I'm going to
set up my stove in a bucket, and pack dirt around the fuel canister to
keep it stable and upright (and far from anything that might melt or
burn). And yes, I'll only use it outside.

![Demonstrating the use of mosquito protection gear for Bo -- you can
tell I'm not really excited about
mosquitoes](http://vort.org/media/images/bug_net_shopping.jpeg)

I was able to find a SIM card for my MyTouch 3G, which is awesome.
Unfortunately, [MTS](http://www.mtsgsm.com/) doesn't know how to
automatically configure Android phones for GPRS. At least, that's what I
could understand from the girl at the MTS store. That conversation was
conducted mostly through hand gestures and giggling, and was a testament
to the power of technology-related acronyms to puncture language
barriers. It's strange to say, "IP for DNS server?" and see the light of
understanding spread across a person's face.

![We bought more than 15,000 Rubles of food for the trip! Actually,
that's pretty reasonable for seven people.](http://vort.org/media/images/shopping_for_uzon.jpeg)

Last of all, there was the food. By the time we all got to the grocery
at 7:00 in the evening, we were almost totally spent. Still, we had to
shop for another two hours before we had everything we need (at least, I
hope we have everything we need).

This morning a truck from the Institute arrived at the apartment to pick
up our food and laboratory equipment. We're not totally sure if we will
be riding with it to Uzon, or if it will go on a separate helicopter.
So, we had to waterproof everything last night in case it had to spend
the day (or evening) on the landing site in the rain. I am glad we had
plenty of plastic bags and tape!

![Our food and lab equipment getting picked up](http://vort.org/media/images/shipment_to_uzon.jpeg)

With luck, we will catch our helicopter to Uzon this evening.
