Title: Lecture Summary 02/19/2007
Date: 2007-02-19 19:25:25
Category: general
Slug: lecture-summary-02-19-2007
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: physics, school
Summary: 


There is no class today on account of President's day. Instead, here is
the summary for Wednesday's lecture, which I neglected to post.

We began examining the geometry of the scattering problem. The
scattering geometry is this: A target sits at the origin of a spherical
coordinate system. A beam of particles is directed at the target. The
target is treated as a macroscopic object, so the beam is expressed in
terms of a "probability current." This is simply a way of treating a
continuous stream of traveling wave functions. Of course, each wave
function must be normalized, but because the beam is switched on for an
arbitrary length of time (forever) the beam itself is not. Thus, the
probability current formalism describes the flux of probability through
the surface. Typically, one would choose the surface to be the
beam-facing surface of the target.

Some sort of interaction occurs among the particles in the target and
the particles in the beam; usually, the particles in the beam are
scattered off of a potential in the target. The [Rutherford scattering
experiment](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rutherford_scattering) is an
example of a beam scattered by a potential. Alternatively, interaction
with the beam could change the state of the target; a photon beam could
excite the valence electrons in the target, which would eventually
return to the unexcited state and re-emit the photons, or beam of
positrons could annihilate with electrons in the target, or a beam of
high-energy neutrons could smash the target nuclei into assorted atomic
debris. If the beam is scattered by the target without changing the
state of the target, this is called elastic scattering.

The scattering problem is useful because because beam-target
interactions will divert the beam into a characteristic angular
distribution of beam particles. The scattering problem can be used to
study the properties of the target, the beam, the interaction, or any
combination thereof.

### Nonrelativistic elastic scattering

To introduce the technique, we consider a beam of nonrelativistic,
spinless particles scattered elastically by a fixed potential. Because
the number of collisions in a given time will vary with the beam
intensity, it is convenient to eliminate the time interval from the
equations by expressing the problem in terms of a *cross section*. The
term is an analogy to the classical collision problem; one may imagine
the target as a cloud of spheres with a given radius. The classical
cross section of such a system would be the sum of the two-dimensional
area presented by each sphere to the beam per unit volume of the target.
One can think of it roughly as the "effective area" per unit area of the
target, or as the "opacity" of the target.

For Coulomb scattering, the beam and the target will not actually
contact one another (otherwise we would have to take other forces into
account, and it wouldn't be Coulomb scattering any more). The cross
section is then the area within which a beam particle will
"significantly" interact with a target particle. Rather than specifying
some arbitrary definition of "significantly," it is better to define the
problem in terms of a *differential* cross section which scatters the
the beam into a differential solid angle. This is better illustrated by
a picture, so I'll stop blathering about the geometry.

<p>
<center>
[![](http://vort.org/media/images/scattering.png)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:ScatteringDiagram.svg)

</center>
As I mentioned above, the beam is not normalizable. Generally, one
treats it as a plane wave. The scattering problem amounts to calculating
over what solid angle the probability current passing through a given
differential cross section will be scattered by a potential.
