Title: Making New Friends
Date: 2006-10-20 03:37:49
Category: general
Slug: making-new-friends
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: politics
Summary: 


It's finally starting to happen -- the so-called "chamber of commerce"
conservatives are throwing up their hands and [walking away from the
Republican
party](http://www.zwire.com/site/news.cfm?BRD=1459&dept_id=155743&newsid=17284084&PAG=461&rfi=9).
They've finally started to realize that their interests don't align with
the Republican party. The Democratic Party is going to find itself
swelling with refugees fleeing the GOP meltdown. These folks aren't
liberal by any stretch of the imagination, but somehow the Democratic
Party is going to have to figure out what to do with them. They've never
been part of the Democratic coalition before, but they are going to be,
like it or not.

To emphasize how important this is going to be, look at it this way. For
the first time, Union and Management are going to find themselves in the
same party. How is that going to work? This isn't an abstract question.
If the Democrats regain control of the government, they are going to
have to write and pass legislation. If they are going to govern
effectively (and stay in power), they are going to have to figure out
how to write legislation that keeps both Union and Management
constituencies happy. How?

It will not be possible to avoid the issue. Business conservatives are
showing up at our doorstep with suitcases of issues that have been
ignored under the Republican reign. The enforcement agencies that police
financial markets have been allowed to rot, and as a result corruption
is mushrooming. What enforcement actions are undertaken are often seen
as political haymaking, not effective market supervision. In spite of
decades of pandering to small business owners, the GOP tax cuts have
done little to ease their tax burden. The collapse of public education
in many communities has made it more difficult to hire competent
workers. The intolerance and bigotry of the extreme right wing of the
Republican party has alienated many people that business conservatives
would rather keep as friends. "Who cares if they're gay? They're paying
customers," such people might say.

On the other hand, working folks have been getting screwed since the
'70s, and things are starting to get desperate. After the women's rights
movement in the '60s allowed women who wanted careers to take their
place in the workforce, the rising cost of living in the '70s forced the
rest of them to find work. The average age of retirement has continued
to climb, so that when most people are ready to start families, their
parents are still working. Changes in the job market have made a college
degree nearly mandatory, so children can't start working until many
years after reaching adulthood. Nevertheless, the cost of living is
*still* rising faster than wages, and unless we repeal the child labor
laws, families have no one left to send to work.

The one issue where I think Union and Management would agree is this:
Health care costs too much. This doesn't automatically mean that the
solution is a nationalized health care system, but it does mean that the
Democrats are going to have to do *something* about this issue. The
strong presence of liberals and conservatives in the party that will
likely write and pass the resulting legislation will, I hope, lead to a
plan that avoids the hereditary mistakes of both camps. The new
conservative Democrats will push for a plan that is simple, cost
effective, limited in scope, and flexible. The liberal Democratic
old-guard will push for a plan that is universal, progressive, generous,
and fair. What America actually needs is a plan that is all of those
things at once.

There are other issues where business conservatives and labor Democrats
will be able to find common ground. After a decade of outsourcing
manufacturing jobs to China, American businesses are starting to wake up
to discover that their offshoring partners are now offshore competitors.
Competitors that receive billions of dollars of subsidies (I mean
"investments") from their respective governments. When their former
partners start selling products on their own, the American company finds
itself without a factory and competing with its own products. Their once
proud enterprises in ruins, American manufacturing executives and
American union bosses have shuffled into the same dusty saloon.
Hopefully, the newcomers won't be too offended when union Democrats
answer their complaints with, "Told you so."

Clearly, America has to get its dependence on Chinese manufacturing
under control. We need to rebuild our manufacturing sector and
reinitialize the cycle of investment and innovation. The traditional
solution offered by union Democrats is import tariffs. This is probably
a dumb idea. Hopefully business conservatives will bring some new ideas
to the table.

There will probably be a lot of fighting. Culturally, there is a huge
gulf between "chamber of commerce" conservatives and the rest of the
Democratic party. Some of that animosity has been around since before
the Civil War. If this coalition is going to work, Democrats are going
to have to work *extremely* hard. If it is successful, it would be a
turning point in America's history. Bringing commercial interests into
harmony with labor, environmental and progressive social interests would
unleash a great dancing, happy monster into the world.
