Title: Mazel Tov
Date: 2008-05-15 22:36:31
Category: general
Slug: mazal-tov
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: speech
Summary: 


The Supreme Court of California has
[ruled](http://www.courtinfo.ca.gov/opinions/documents/S147999.PDF) that
the ban on same-sex marriage is unconstitutional. Even the dissenting
justices wrote that they support same-sex marriage -- they are of
opinion that it isn't mandated by the California constitution.

Honestly, I was expecting it to go the other way.

Patt Morrison had a lawyer for the losing side on her show a few minutes
ago, and he basically framed his position this way: Allowing same-sex
couples to get married places personal choice above community standards.
Allowing people to ignore community standards will erode the morality of
our culture. That sounds like a pretty weird argument for a supposedly
conservative point of view.

When it comes to something as private and personal as marriage, let
community standards be damned. America's uniqueness flows from its
protection of personal liberty, even when that means protecting things
that you would not do yourself, or that make you feel uncomfortable when
other people do them. I've visited the [Harmonious
Society](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harmonious_society), and I like it
here better. A lot of blood has been spilled over the years for the
liberty we now enjoy. If living in a free society means we have to watch
dudes kissing on TV, I'd say that's a bargain price for a lot of
protected liberty.

Mazel Tov.
