Title: The moral imperative for Open Science
Date: 2012-02-09 02:41:09
Category: general
Slug: moral-imperative-open-science
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: science, eisenlab, research
Summary: 


So, there is this law in Congress called the [Research Works
Act](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Research_Works_Act). If enacted, it
would prohibit open access mandates by federal granting agencies. It
would end the policy that NIH-funded research be deposited in PubMed,
and it would prevent other agencies from establishing such policies. It
is a bad idea for a lot of reasons. If you want a elegant dissection of
the reasons why the Research Works Act is a bad idea, I suggest [Michael
Eisen's many posts on the topic.](http://www.michaeleisen.org/blog/)

There is now <a "http: thecostofknowledge.com ">an effort to boycott
Elsevier</a>, the authors and primary proponents of the Research Works
Act. I signed the pledge, though unfortunately my name doesn't carry
much weight. Last week, my advisor got a little worked up about it, and
suggested that scientists should perhaps [ignore papers published by
Elsevier](http://phylogenomics.blogspot.com/2012/01/boycotting-elsevier-is-not-enough-time.html),
and then [changed his mind about
it](http://phylogenomics.blogspot.com/2012/02/q-about-elsevier-my-blog-retraction-and.html)
after some [cogent arguments were
raised](https://twitter.com/#!/drugmonkeyblog/status/164000005538058240).

It won't serve the progress of science to ignore new discoveries because
we don't like the journals they were published in. However, I do not
believe that this point, however cogent, is enough to carry the day. He
wasn't suggesting that we ignore the discovery, but rather to ignore the
*publication*. We can, and should, treat publications in closed access
journals as *illegitimate claims to the scientific record*.

I was a little puzzled at first that Jonathan didn't make this point.
After all, Michael and Jonathan are often called Open Access
stormtroopers. But then I remembered that, despite their passion,
storming and trooping are not really in their natures. They lack the
necessary highhanded arrogance for those activities. As a physicist who
jumped into biology late in my education, it's often been pointed out to
me that there is nothing so noxiously arrogant as a physicist
moonlighting as a biologist. I try very hard not to be "that guy," but I
still get the occasional eye roll. So, just for this occasion, I'm going
to uncork a little physicist's swagger by framing the need for Open
Access scientific publication as a moral absolute.

Whenever something is unclear, the physicist in me always looks at two
things. First, I look at the asymptotic behavior (the extremes), and
then I look at simplified models that match the asymptotic behavior.
Then I check to see if I've got the right model by looking at how it
scales and generalizes to the full problem.

On the continuum of open to closed access publishing, the asymptotic
behavior in the closed-access direction is simply not publishing a
finding at all. In this case, the moral reasoning is simple (that is not
to say universally agreed upon, but simple nevertheless). Take [the
invention of
Calculus](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leibniz%E2%80%93Newton_calculus_controversy),
for example. Leibniz, not Newton, was the one who did the work, took the
risks, and invested time and effort to bring Calculus to the world. In
my opinion, this is what matters in terms of establishing precedence.
The more one examines Newton's behavior, the more one wishes to credit
Leibniz. I am willing to take the plunge and assert that the precise
chronology is irrelevant to the question of apportioning credit. What is
relevant is the work of pedagogy.

Publishing in a closed-access journal is secret-keeping. It keeps the
information confined among a certain group of people. Combined with
copyright, it is a life-destroying secret to anyone who shares it
without permission. I think it would be fair to weight the amount of
credit according to the extent to which the discovery was shared.

Now I'm going to resort to another irritating behavior typical of
physicists; I shall reduce a complicated, nuanced situation to a
Gedankenexperiment preserving only the essential features, and then
extrapolate the results back to the real world.

Suppose you are making soup for dinner, and you discover that a quart of
bleach has somehow spilled into the soup. You immediately tell your
family that the soup is poisoned. Nobody eats the soup. Dinner is
ruined, but everyone is safe. This is what a normal person would do.

Now let's look at the other extreme. Suppose you noticed soup was
poisoned, but you kept it to yourself. You watch your family eat the
soup, and they get sick. Only a very, very bad person would do this.

We have a sort of emotional model that lets us make a moral judgement
about the behavior of the discoverer in this situation. It's easy to
make a moral judgement about the extremes, which is why we looked at
them. Now, let's look at the in-between situation.

Suppose instead of announcing the discovery, you tell your son that you
know something very important. You demand that he give you something
precious in order for you to tell him what it is. Then, after taking
away one of his favorite toys, you whisper your discovery about the soup
into his ear. Then you tell him he mustn't tell anyone, or he will be in
*very* big trouble. So much trouble that you will take *all* his toys
away and never speak to him again. Then you let your spouse and daughter
eat the soup, and they get sick.

The in-between behavior is *more unethical* than the "bad" extreme! Yes,
it's better that one fewer person is hurt, but that is a statement about
the outcome, not about the behavior of the discoverer. Selecting the
in-between behavior just as callous, but adds cruelty and selfishness.

If you behaved this way, it is clear you would not deserve full credit
for your discovery. At most, you could claim one third of the possible
credit for your discovery because you only shared the knowledge with one
third of the people who stood to be affected by it. Most people would
give you much less credit than that. We have many pungent words for
people who behave like this which I shall not enumerate.

This scenario is *exactly* equivalent to publishing in a closed access
journal. An author cannot excuse themselves by drawing a distinction
between the practices of the journal and their own practices and wishes;
by choosing a journal, the author chooses that journal's behavior. There
are hundreds of journals with a rich spectrum of behaviors ranging from
upstanding and public-spirited to cynical and predatory. Through your
choice of journal, you must own that journal's behavior.

Science is a universal human enterprise. When an important discovery is
made, it eventually touches the lives of every singe human being. If you
keep a discovery secret from *anyone*, you are behaving reprehensibly.
It is only fair that your credit and reputation should suffer as a
consequence. It is only fair for other scientists to question the
legitimacy of your claim to the credit.

The simple and appropriate punishment for keeping secrets is to always
treat the first *openly available* paper as the actual record of
discovery. The fact that someone else may have discovered it first, and
kept it secret, is a technicality of interest only to historians. This
is what science has always done. I am merely suggesting that we regard
secrecy on a sliding scale, and to take into account the role that
science plays in the world.

What scientists, especially American scientists, need to begin doing is
to take a more pragmatic view of what constitutes a secret. What
fraction of human beings on Earth have access to Elsevier's catalog? One
in a thousand? One in a hundred thousand? One in a million?

The problem isn't the cost. It's the behavior. If you told both of your
children about the poisoned soup, but not your spouse, you'd still be an
asshole. If you decreased the number of toys that needed to be
sacrificed to have access to the discovery, you'd still be an asshole.
If you relaxed the punishment for sharing the secret discovery, you'd
still be an asshole. If you shared only a summary of your discovery
(e.g., 'some of the food in this house has been poisoned'), you'd still
be an asshole.

There is *one*, and *only one* ethical way to handle a discovery, and
that is to share it freely.
