Title: Moving forward by stopping
Date: 2012-04-02 16:06:11
Category: general
Slug: moving-forward-stopping
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: driving, cars, transportation, traffic, deaths, commuting, bicycle, california, transport, accident, car, davis, life
Summary: 


Just a three weeks after I was [sworn in for my
term](http://cityofdavis.org/meetings/safety/120111_packet.pdf) on the
City of Davis [Safety and Parking Advisory
Commission](http://cityofdavis.org/meetings/agenda.cfm?c=14), UC Davis
law student [Megan Glanville was
killed](http://www.legacy.com/obituaries/chicoer/obituary.aspx?n=megan-elizabeth-glanville&pid=155337885)
just a few dozen feet from my doorstep. She was out jogging on a foggy
morning, and truck coming into town from the county road [ran her
down](http://www.davisenterprise.com/local-news/crime-fire-courts/woman-hit-by-truck-in-west-davis/)
in the crosswalk. I never knew Megan, but her death deeply upsets me.

I've been
[worrying](http://vort.org/2009/04/21/fun-my-tracks-accident-and-biking-davis/)
[about](http://vort.org/2009/05/23/tale-rampaging-lorry/)
[pedestrian](http://vort.org/2009/04/25/bike-saftey-davis/) and
[bike](http://vort.org/2009/06/19/bike-safety-column-print/)
[safety](http://vort.org/2007/10/31/protect-your-noodle/) ever since my
[little sister was nearly
killed](http://vort.org/2009/04/29/davis-crash-map/) by a careless
driver.

I find it extremely frustrating that most people do not look beyond the
(usually imagined) *behavior* of the people involved in an accident like
the one that almost killed my sister, or that did kill Megan Glanville.
Either they identify with the frustrating experience of driving, and
blame the victim, or they side with the law, and place the
responsibility at the feet of the operator of the more dangerous
vehicle. I will always side with the person who suffered more, but both
views are myopic. When someone has been killed in an accident, the
question of who was more "right" in that sliver of time is irrelevant.
It is worse than irrelevant; it is an insult to the lives of all the
people affected.

There are other, far more urgent questions that need to be raised. If
you see a problem, the first question you should *always* ask is, "In
what way am I responsible for this?" We are all bound together by bonds
of mutual responsibility, and *nothing* happens among people, good or
bad, for which each of us are not in some sense responsible. That is
what words like "society," "community," and "civilization" mean. They
describe the fact that the bonds that link us together are fundamentally
inescapable. There is such a thing as integrity, but there is no such
thing as self-reliance. Interdependence is the very essence of what
makes us human. And so, if you see something that upsets you, the first
thing you should look at is your own role in causing it. Through our
choices, we were all present on morning that George Souza killed Megan
Glanville. You. Me. Everyone. We all had a hand in it.

Clearly, we failed. You failed. I failed. Someone is dead as a
consequence of that failure.

So, let us set aside the choices of George Souza and Megan Glanville,
and look at the choices *we* made that contributed to this terrible
thing. They are easy enough to see :

![](http://vort.org/media/images/lake_and_russell_redesign_crossing_3.jpg)

This is the crosswalk where Megan was killed, which is part of a system
of roads that belong to the City of Davis. The arrow on the yellow sign
is pointing almost directly at the spot. The laws that govern the design
of the road are a kaleidoscopic fugue of local, county, state, federal
and international regulations. Within that often contradictory matrix of
statutes, the city government has a small keyhole of authority within
which it may choose what the road looks like and how it works.

From an engineering point of view, it's pretty clear what the problem
is. The road on the left is just a stone's throw from the border of the
city. Beyond the border, it is a wide county road that cuts a nearly
straight line for miles among orchards and farms. When it crosses into
the city, this road suddenly plunges into a dense residential
neighborhood with no transition whatsoever. The intersection where Megan
was killed is the very first intersection an eastbound driver encounters
in the City of Davis. So, drivers come in from the county road going at
county road speeds, and roar through this intersection where people are
trying to cross to the bike path that parallels the road. Add a little
darkness and bit of fog, and the accident was basically inevitable.

Why was this intersection designed this way? I don't know. According to
the laws and statutes that regulate its engineering, there is nothing
particularly wrong with it. But then again, houses that catch fire and
burn people alive inside are often built to code. Compliance with the
law is not enough. Only thoughtful design can keep people safe, and the
absence of that thoughtfulness killed someone.

So, who is to blame? The legislators who wrote the statues describing
how intersections should be designed? The engineers whose designs were
constrained by those statutes? The City of Davis Public Works Department
that built and maintained it? Surely, some of the responsibility falls
to them. But not very much. If you've ever driven, walked or bicycled
through the intersection of Lake and Russell, then a great deal of the
responsibility falls on you. If you've ever felt uncomfortable or unsafe
while passing through it, then you *knew* someone would get hurt there
sooner or later.

The Council Chambers are open to the public. The meetings and agendas
are available weeks in advance for all to see, at
[CityOfDavis.org](http://cityofdavis.org/). You can even submit your
concerns in writing if you don't have time to come to the meetings. In
other words, you had the reason and the means to get this fixed, or at
least play a part in getting it fixed, *before* Megan Glanville was
killed. I share in this responsibility; I serve on the commission
charged with advising the City Council on these things, and I did not
raise this issue either. And I use this intersection several times a
day. And I always feel unsafe. It is my fault too.

So, here is what is going to happen. The City Council was asked, and
agreed, to take steps to prevent anyone else from getting killed. The
proposed changes will add stop signs on Russell Boulevard in both
directions, a blinking red light in case drivers don't see the stop
signs in the fog, and four new street lights for better illumination
overall. It will cost about \$20,000.

[![](http://vort.org/media/images/lake_and_russell_redesign_small.jpeg)](http://vort.org/media/images/lake_and_russell_redesign.jpeg)

This is a much better design. It's impossible to know if it would have
saved Megan's life had it been in place in December, but it seems likely
that it would have. I strongly support it.

Roads are not natural phenomena. They are public infrastructure, and
they are designed and built and maintained in exactly the way the public
asks them to be. Let's try to do a better job of holding up our end of
that conversation.
