Title: My talk at the Thermophiles Workshop
Date: 2010-08-25 14:34:37
Category: general
Slug: my-talk-thermophiles-workshop
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: science, grad, school, kamchatka, thermophiles, russia, eisenlab, metagenomics, research
Summary: 


When I registered for the workshop, the organizers asked me to give a 20
minute talk on my topic of research. I only just finished my coursework
in May, so I didn't have a great deal of work to present ([at least not
in microbiology...](http://vort.org/2008/12/10/published/)).

So, I submitted an
[abstract](http://vort.org/media/papers/neches-kamchatka-abstract.pdf)
titled, "Classification of environmental sequence data using multiple
sources of inference." This project is a collaboration with [Andrey
Kislyuk](http://topaz.gatech.edu/~kislyuk/), who has just graduated from
Georgia Tech, supervised by [Joshua
Weitz](http://ecotheory.biology.gatech.edu/). It's a pretty cool
project, but Andrey has just graduated and moved on to [Pacific
Biosciences](http://www.pacificbiosciences.com/), so things haven't
moved as quickly as I would have liked.

After the first day of talks, I started to get pretty nervous; I thought
I would have some downtime during the field expedition to work on my
slides. Downtime when Frank Robb, Albert Colman and Anna Perevalova are
around? Ha! If I'd met them before walking off the airplane in
Petropavlovsk, I would have known how ridiculous an idea that was.

To make matters worse, the organizers had to shift the schedule forward
by a day because weather delayed the excursion to Uzon (which I was not
planning to join, since I'd just spent a week there). Thus, I found
myself in the position of giving and unfinished talk about an unfinished
project. Worse, I was going to stand up and talk about probability
theory and [Bayesian
priors](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayesian_probability) to a roomfull
of people who ride submarines into underwater volcanoes and discover
whole new branches of Earthly life. Worse still, I had to follow Frank
Robb's talk about isolating and sequencing organisms that grow on
syngas, which he had to cut short because there was just too much
awesome for one talk to hold.

To my surprise, I manged to finish the slides during lunch and the
coffee break. Also to my surprise, I got a lot of really great
questions, and lots of people seemed weirdly excited about the idea of
using more than one mathematical technique for sifting through
metagenomic data.

I've recently started working on one such analysis (a different project
altogether), and I'm gaining an appreciation for just how difficult it
is. Perhaps the interest in my talk has more to do with the fact that
people in the field really, really want better tools, and there's a lot
of enthusiasm for anything that looks halfway promising.

Also, I have to give a big thumbs up to the Russians (and other folks)
who gave their talks in English. I once had to give a brief talk on
physics in Japanese, and it was one of the most difficult, stressful
experiences of my life. It was only five minutes, and I was aided by the
fact that Japanese borrows many technical and scientific terms from
English. It's not really fair that English is the *de facto*
international language, but I'm really, really glad it is.
