Title: New Car!
Date: 2006-12-02 20:02:50
Category: general
Slug: new-car
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: life
Summary: 


I'm sure this is old news to most people who know me, but I bought a new
car a little while ago. It's a 2007 Toyota Yaris Liftback with a manual
transmission. I bought it through Costco's car purchase program, which I
highly recommend to anyone shopping for a new car. Negotiating with car
dealers is always a headache, and I wasted three weeks trying to
convince dealers to actually sell me the car I wanted. Once I went
through Costco, it was a snap. You still buy from a dealer, but
effectively you let Costco do the negotiating for you.

In the end, I bought it from Torrance Toyota dealership. They were very
nice.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/new_yaris.jpg)

The Yaris is a great little car. It is peppy, its handling is responsive
but not twitchy, and it is comfortable. I would describe it as "adroit,"
but that is anthropomorphizing a bit too much. It is a small car, but it
isn't cramped. I'm 6'3" (when I stand up straight), and I don't need to
push the driver's seat back all the way. It's even possible for a
normal-sized person to sit behind me (though maybe not comfortably
enough for a long road trip). Most aspects of the car are minimalist but
clever. The factory sound system is surprisingly good.

The gas mileage is quite good. I've filled the tank up twice so far, and
I calculate that I'm getting just shy of 40 MPG. I should be able to
improve that a little as I get used to the clutch and don't need to rev
the engine so much when starting in first.

That said, I'm a little disappointed that it's still impossible to buy
an electric car. The Yaris, and vehicles of its class, could easily be
electric. The Yaris is a commuter appliance, not a family car. They are
too small for most people to want to take them on long road trips, so a
range of 100 miles is perfectly acceptable. That's easily within the
reach of today's technology.

For the last several years, America has supposedly been the land of the
pickup tuck and the SUV. However, at the same time, America absolutely
fell in love with the Toyota Prius and the hybrid engine. Car companies
executives seem to understand well enough that there is demand for a
wide spectrum of vehicles -- Toyota itself offers a bewilderingly
extensive range of models. Why can't they understand that there is also
a demand for a wide spectrum of engine technologies? People who buy
minivans might well be interested in taking the family on a road trip to
Yosemite, but that same family probably owns another car that almost
never travels more than 50 miles from home. The bulk of American drivers
live in or very near urban centers, where smaller, electric cars would
be ideal. Yet, car companies seem unable to sell anything but large,
general purpose vehicles.

One day, a car company will realize this, and make billions. It would
make me very happy if those billions stayed here in the USA.
