Title: O'Connor concerned about an American Dictatorship
Date: 2006-03-10 13:46:00
Category: general
Slug: oconnor-concerned-about-an-american-dictatorship
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: politics
Summary: 


One of the more curious things about the Republican Party is that it
hates the government. Back in the early 1990s, this might have seemed an
odd position to take, given the commonly construed purpose of a
political party. After all, would you hire a doctor who proudly
proclaimed that "I hate sick people?" Or, how about a gardener who told
you, "I hate those lousy, miserable plants?" Or a teacher that told you
of their loathing of children? Yet, that's exactly what the GOP did, and
for some reason, Americans voted for them.

Fast forward to today. The GOP has made good on its tacit promise,
which, after all, was never *really* about "small government." It was
about contempt for government. I'm not going to enumerate the ways in
which this has manifested itself -- other people have done a much more
thorough job of that than I can ever hope to do.

So, when Sandra Day O'Connor [warns us about the GOP assault on the
Judicial
system](http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=5255712),
it sends cold chills up my spine. To explain why I find this such a
frightening idea, let me regale you with my own small experience with
the Judicial system. Yes, I know it is trivial compared to the Big Ideas
people usually talk about, but stick with me if you can. There is a good
reason why I bring this up.

A little more than a year ago, I bought a 1963 VW Bug, which I have
named Gunther. Gunther has an original yellow-on-black California
license plate that issued when the car was new. A few months after
purchasing the car, I received a ticket for a violation of California
Vehicle Code section 5200: Display of Plates. "No front plate," read the
comment. As far as I know, in 1963, VW did not provide mounting hardware
for front plates. Indeed, many cars of that vintage had no front
mounting hardware. Was the law requiring a front plate retroactive, or
did it only apply to cars after its passage?

I investigated the vehicle code, and as it turns out, the section under
which I was cited reads as follows:

1.  When two license plates are issued by the department for use upon a
    vehicle, they shall be attached to the vehicle for which they were
    issued, one in the front and the other in the rear.
2.  When only one license plate is issued for use upon a vehicle, it
    shall be attached to the rear thereof, unless the license plate is
    issued for use upon a truck tractor, in which case the license plate
    shall be displayed in accordance with Section 4850.5.

*Oh? What about that section (b) there?* I wondered. It would seem that
this law only requires me to display the plates I was issued (or were
issued for the vehicle, anyway, since I wasn't alive at the time). So,
how many plates had been issued? When did it become mandatory for the
DMV to issue two plates? My questions were answered by section 4850,
which became effective January 1, 1987 :

1.  The department, upon registering a vehicle, shall issue to the owner
    two partially or fully reflectorized license plates or devices for a
    motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, and one partially or fully
    reflectorized license plate or device for all other vehicles
    required to be registered under this code. The plates or devices
    shall identify the vehicles for which they are issued for the period
    of their validity.
2.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no contract shall be let
    to any nongovernmental entity for the purchase or securing of
    reflectorized material for the plates, unless the department has
    made every reasonable effort to secure qualified bids from as many
    independent, responsible bidders as possible. No contract shall be
    let to any nongovernmental entity for the manufacturing of
    reflectorized safety license plates.
3.  In addition to any other fees specified in this code, a fee of one
    dollar (\$1) for reflectorization shall be paid only by those
    vehicle owners receiving license plates or devices under this
    section.
4.  This section does not require vehicle owners with nonreflectorized
    license plates or devices to replace them with reflectorized plates
    or devices.
5.  This section shall be known as the Schrade-Belotti Act.

After much scouring, it seems that this is the only statute in the
vehicle code that has anything to say about how many plates should be
*issued*. And, as you can see from subsection (d), it is not
retroactive. I contested the ticket, and several others that I received.
With persistence, I prevailed in adjudication on each one.

Eventually, I received a ticket directly from an officer (the others
were basically parking tickets). Oddly enough, the officer was also an
owner of an early 1960's bug, but he assured me that both he and I were
required to display a front plate. He as unimpressed by my citation of
statute, and unimpressed that I had prevailed in adjudication. He was
very polite and professional, but nevertheless incorrect. So, I took the
case to trial.

At the trial, the judge questioned us both very sharply, and I was
expecting him to either ignore the statute, or to refuse to let me read
it. However, when I mentioned the two statues I've cited above, he
paused, and ordered the bailiff to bring over a massive tome sitting on
a nearby piece of battered furniture. He leafed through it, read the
statutes, and then read them aloud to the court. He then swiftly
concluded that my argument was sound, and reminded the officer that
copies of the vehicle code are freely available.

Now, I didn't prevail in all matters that day. Although I won the point
about the plates, I lost a point I had argued about a dim tail light,
and I was ordered to pay the fine for it. However, it was an eye-opening
experience. I've read a fair bit about how the three branches of
government are supposed to check one another, and how this is supposed
to protect our freedom. However, this seemingly unimportant court case
crystallized in my mind what it actually *means*.

We have an independent judiciary. The judge in my case did not answer to
the police, despite his speech before the trial warning, essentially,
"*Woe unto he who disrespects a police officer in my court!*" The
judicial branch intervened on *my* behalf, personally, to check the
power of the executive branch. It was only able to do so because it is
not part of the executive branch, nor does it take orders from the
executive branch. Arnold Schwarzenegger himself could have turned up at
my trial to personally vouch for the officer's argument, and the judge
would still have had a free hand.

This gives me a new clarity about how our government is supposed to
work. In the life of a normal person, one is likely to come into contact
with only agents of the executive branch. Most conspicuously, this
includes the police, but also the DMV and a constellation of other
agencies. Should these agents of the executive ignore or overstep the
law (or as in my case, are unaware of its particulars), the courts are
our only protection. Indeed, it is trivial little cases like mine, ones
that are so unimportant that they aren't even mentioned in tiny type in
the murky back pages of the most news-starved weekly circuar, that
represent the real heavy lifting of the Judicial System. The
checking-and-balancing that our constitution encourages is neither
theoretical nor rare. It isn't just the front-page-news cases when the
checking and balancing takes place. Judges step in and actively check
the power of the executive hundreds, maybe thousands, of times a day on
behalf or regular folks like you and me. Without them, our freedoms
would amount to little more than some ink splashed on a moldering
parchment.

This is what Sandra Day O'Connor is talking about. When the Judiciary
checks the Executive, it protects us from the tyranny of a dictator.
When it checks the Legislature, it protects us from the tyranny of the
Mob. And when I say "protects," I mean it protects you personally. If
the courts are undermined, those protections will vanish. Our system of
checks and balances is like a daily exchange of artillery fire, with
thousands huge salvos of shells wizzing to and fro at all hours. If the
guns of the courts are silenced, the battle line will move very quickly.
If they do, then you will never again be able to argue with a police
officer, except perhaps with his permission.
