Title: Presidential forums with awkward names
Date: 2007-11-20 15:31:42
Category: general
Slug: presidential-forums-with-awkward-names
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: global, warming, climate, change, hillary, clinton, edwards, kucinich
Summary: 


On Saturday, I decided to head to the VA complex next to UCLA to watch
the Global Warming & America's Energy Future Presidential Forum. I guess
you could include it among the unending barrage of presidential debates
we're suffering through. Having caught just enough of the last
Democratic debate on CNN to ruin an otherwise enjoyable dinner, I was
was pleasantly surprised that this forum turned out to be rather
interesting.

The panelists asked sharp questions, but there was no attempt to "get"
the candidates. There was a refreshing absence of false dichotomies,
litmus tests and provocations. They just asked difficult, technical
questions. For example, Edwards said that we ought to essentially ban
coal, but that coal miners should not be made to bare brunt of this
economic realignment because the problem is not their fault. He was
asked the obvious follow-on question : That means compensation. How do
we pay for it?

And then something astonishing happened. Edwards answered the question
directly, and the panelists *let him*. He'd already explained that to
reduce emissions, we need some kind of carbon tax. It's estimated that
such a system would raise about 20-40 billion dollars a year, depending
on the details of implementation (which is up to Congress). This block
of money would be divided among three goals; remediation of
environmental damage, research, and helping people in "dirty" industries
get new, better jobs.

The audience was very enthusiastic throughout, but the enthusiasm
crested highest on the occasions when the panelists, candidates and
moderator insulted CNN, particularly Tim Russert. I guess this reflects
the fact that the only thing less popular than Congress is the Media. If
Wolf Blitzer had walked onto the stage, he would have been booed out of
the hall. Child molesters are more popular than the Media.

The candidates don't have to use FOX or CNN as their forum. There are
lots and lots of nonpartisan issue-oriented groups that would happily
host debates. The questions will be less stupid, and the format won't be
designed to maximize catfighting. Issue-oriented groups will listen to
answers longer than 15 seconds without getting bored, assuming the
candidates stay more or less on topic.

The biggest surprise, for me anyway, was that I felt a lot more
confident about Hillary after hearing her speak without an idiot media
stooge nipping at her heels. She made it very clear that she understands
the issue of climate change, and that she understands the need for bold
action. She has some specific proposals, but they aren't really unique
from what Edwards proposes -- not that I fault her for that. It's pretty
obvious what needs to be done, so all the serious proposals will tend to
look about the same. I suppose I shouldn't be surprised, because her
intelligence has never been in question.

The trouble I have with Hillary is not concern that she would make a
good president. I think she would do a pretty good job. At least as good
as her husband did, and probably better. She is smart and capable, and
her priorities are pretty much right. The problem I have with her is
that I think she would make and *awful* leader for the progressive
movement. She represents a view -- "The perfect is the enemy of the
good" she said during the forum -- that is immiscible with philosophical
leadership. She would be a competent administrator. She would work hard
and push for the right things. But I can't see her galvanizing a new
progressive coalition. She would leave the Democratic party in the same
state her husband left it; hollowed out and fractured.

The electorate is crackling with a punishing voltage of dissatisfaction,
and it isn't any mystery what is pissing people off. There are very
real, terrible problems facing our country. People have a whole menu of
issues to be pissed off about -- climate change, our inept
counterterrorism policies, income inequality, health care, a hostile
international community, our diseased financial system, the trade
imbalance, Iraq, and more. And Washington is doing nothing to fix this
stuff. *Nothing*.

On one terminal, we have three hundred million Americans who like to get
shit done, and on the other terminal, we have a few hundred politicians
in Washington who aren't doing shit. The system has been charging up for
a very, very long time. We need a president who will be a big fat wire
between these two terminals. We need a way to pipe our collective
dissatisfaction into Washington until its denizens either get to work or
vaporize from the political scene. I can't see Hillary doing that. She
is a natural insulator; her natural instincts are to mediate and
compromise. That's very admirable, and in a different situation would be
highly desirable. But if someone doesn't hook the terminals up,
eventually the whole thing will short out and we can kiss democracy
goodbye.

Maybe I'm wrong about Hillary. A lot of people are enthusiastic about
her, and that's a good sign. It would be nice if she stopped undermining
the progressive part of the party, and started beating up on the GOP for
keeping Washington paralyzed.

Also, I think a lot of people fail to appreciate what a great thing
Dennis Kucinich is doing for the party. First of all, he's not
undermining the Democratic part by running in a third party, like Nader
did. Second, by running boldly to the left of the pack, he is flanking
the other candidates, making them harder to attack. It's safer for them
to take liberal positions because they will still be moderate on any
scale that includes Kucinich. This something that happens frequently in
Republican primaries -- there is an unpopular fascist thug, and the
other candidates look nice and moderate by defeating him. Not that
Kucinich is an exact mirror of that picture. He would probably be a
center-right candidate in most functioning democracies. This highlights
how important it is for the Democratic party to have people like him.

Now, if we had a few actual *Communists* in Congress, like most
democracies, then moderate liberal politicians would have lots of
maneuvering room. The Democrats could hold up practically any serious
proposal, and it would look conservative when contrasted with the
lunatic position from the Communists. Single-payer healthcare? Look,
it's better than *Communism*, don't you think? You don't want
*Communism*, do you? Great, so vote for our plan.

Anyway, I'm pretty disappointed that Barak Obama didn't come to the
event. It was very unfortunate.
