Title: The Road Ahead
Date: 2009-01-19 19:59:00
Category: general
Slug: road-ahead
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: barack, obama
Summary: 


*Today is that last day of George Bush's presidency.* I have waited
eight years to write those words, and oh how sweet they are!

A good friend of mine remarked recently that while he liked reading my
blog, it was depressing him. So I went back over the archives, and I
realized that a lot of it has been pretty depressing. But then again,
it's been a pretty depressing time for America, and I think a lot about
national issues. There have also been some rough patches in my own life;
my advisor at UCLA closed down his group and moved to the UK, and I had
to figure out what to do with myself. That has colored my writing.

Tomorrow, two things are happening that believe will administer a stiff
dose of optimism around here. First, America will be under new
management. Second, I am scrapping my plans to work in physics, and
joining [Jonathan Eisen's
lab](http://bobcat.genomecenter.ucdavis.edu/mediawiki/index.php/Main_Page).
These are not wholly unrelated events, and so I decided to address them
together.

First up, the big picture stuff.

On the evening of November 7th, 2000, I discovered rather to my surprise
that I do, in fact, love my country. My recollection of the evening and
the time that followed has an amusing resemblance to a romantic comedy;
I played the insensitive jerk who doesn't appreciate his wonderful
girlfriend until she is suddenly gone. Let's say, for the sake of
argument, that she is carried away by baboons. Or perhaps Richard Gere.
Or maybe Richard Gere playing a baboon.

Then, for the first excruciating half of the movie, I slowly begin to
understand how much I needed her. I discover, to the merriment of all,
that I cannot cook, that I don't understand money, and so on. The movie
trailer features a memorable scene in which I am eating molding Chinese
takeout in my underpants as my life comes crashing down around me.

Then, and epiphany! I should win back the girl from the baboons, or
Richard Gere, or whatever. Some amusing side characters are introduced
who help me on my hilarious and humiliating quest of self-discovery and
girl-retrieving.

That's kind of how it went. Instantly, as soon as the results started to
come in, I felt an icy lump in my stomach. When it became clear that
George Bush was going to win, I started to recognize the feeling. It was
familiar. The last time I had experienced it, I was a fifteen-year-old
at the bottom of a drainage ditch, looking at how my right hand was
twisted around backwards and resting backwards against my forearm, the
radius snapped and the ulna cracked lengthwise and telescoped into
itself.

The most lucid memory I have about breaking my arm was that it did not
hurt. The pain came much later, after everything was nicely set and
wrapped up, and the doctors had explained that it would heal nicely. But
at the bottom of the drainage ditch, there was this very singular
feeling. Not fear, or pain, or surprise, but cold, icy *dread*, like the
firmware of my brain had suddenly broadcast the message, **CRITICAL
ERROR!** and terminated everything else in my head. Emotions, ideas,
thoughts, memories, all were gone. There was nothing but a paralyzing
tsunami of *Wrong! Wrong! Wrong!*

That's what I felt on November 8th, 2000. Something terrible had
happened. I had lost something really, really important, but I was too
dumb to understand what it was. My country, which I had loved all along
but never appreciated, had been carried away by baboons.

As the months and years unfolded, I got to know what I had lost from the
shape of the hole it left. I discovered the first ragged edge of that
hole during the [Hainan Island
incident](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/U.S.-China_Spy_Plane_Incident).
America suddenly seemed bumbling and weak, thundering with indignation
and then groveling pathetically. The State Department evidently couldn't
even be bothered to write the official letter of condolence for Wang
Wei's death in Chinese, and so the CCP naturally translated it to sound
like an admission of guilt. The Bush presidency was pretty much downhill
from there.

But this is a romantic comedy, after all. I spent the summer of 2006 in
Oxford, mostly apologizing for the idiot in the White House to all the
nice people I met from the rest of the planet. I came home determined to
get my country back. So I started researching candidates for the midterm
elections. There were some really great people running, and so I sent in
my tiny little donations over the internet. I signed petitions, sent
grumpy letters to newspapers and did a little phone banking. Six months
later, a nice lady from San Francisco became the first woman to wield
the Speaker's gavel.

So, you get the idea. Struggles, setbacks, successes; lots of painful,
cringe-worthy scenes that screenplay authors think are funny. I've got
my country back, and I've learned my lesson. I'm never going to take her
for granted again. Today, the credits roll. The movie is over.

The prognosis for the next couple of years is dismal. The economy sucks,
our financial system has utterly collapsed. Wall Street is a financial
Chernobyl; we've gone through the blackout, the meltdown, a series of
ruinous detonations as various subsystems superheat and explode, and we
are now watching it belch radioactive smoke into the Jet Stream as the
whole thing slowly burns. We are also hurtling towards a
point-of-no-return in the great phase diagram of atmospheric carbon. Oh,
and we're fighting two wars.

Nevertheless, I'm pretty happy. Our problems have solutions. We've just
elected a guy who has a very clear view of this colossal mess we're in,
and doesn't flinch.

Now, I'll take a step down in scale a bit, and talk about why I'm
leaving physics.

I decided to study physics for a very simple reason; our planet's
atmosphere is filling up with carbon, and if we don't stop digging shit
out of the ground and lighting it on fire, we're going to wreck the
place. Like most people, I figured that we need a big source of energy
that doesn't involve burning black stuff from the ground.

But the more I learned about the energy economy, the more I came to
understand how wrong I was. Yes, we use a lot of energy. Most of it is
from burning black shit we dig out of the ground. But for the most part,
we fritter it away. We spend gigawatts lighting empty rooms, running
idle computers and refrigerating nonperishable food. We blow a big
fraction of our electricity into the night sky, benefiting no one,
except perhaps future generations of alien astronomers. We blow billions
of gallons of fuel driving to places we don't want to go, flying to
places we don't want to see, and moving products we don't enjoy.

In the very near future, we're going to have less fuel and less
electricity. And you know what? It's going to be fine. Little by little,
prices will go up, and the waste will go away. In retrospect, we will
see that most of the energy we use today was utterly and completely
wasted. We will learn to waste less of it, and everything will be fine.
People will wonder what the big deal was.

There will be some fancy technologies, like solar panels and wind
turbines. I learned a bit about that by [designing a solar array for my
mother's house](http://vort.org/2008/06/) this summer. It generates more
than she uses, cost about as much as a small car, and took three days to
install. It will pay for itself in about sixteen years, or maybe sooner
if rates keep climbing, and it will last for about 40 years. It was
almost disappointing how straight-forward it was (though it was a lot of
fun). Cutting her energy use from almost 40 kilowatt hours a day to less
than 10 was totally painless. When it's time to replace the washing
machine and the refrigerator, her house will draw less than 7
kilowatt-hours a day. The panels generate about 13 to 17 kilowatt hours
a day; her last electric bill was negative \$102.

In a nutshell, here is the solution to the energy crisis : Stop being a
pussy.

We don't need to be "saved" from this. Not by fusion reactors. Not by
advanced nuclear whatever. Not by magical carbon sequestration. The
human race will have fewer gigawatts to play around with, and so we'll
use them more carefully. The reality of the energy crisis is this: Our
sense of entitlement and its associated low inclination to innovate is
coming face to face with the laws of physics. Physics will win. *Exit
crisis, pursued by a bear.*

Energy is neither cheap nor abundant. It never has been, and it never
will be. If you don't believe me, get on a stationary bike and do 860
calories of work (you'll burn about 2400 calories, or three good meals).
That's one kilowatt-hour. You will be tired as hell. Right now, you pay
about a dime for that much work. No matter how you generate it, it's
crazy to pay so little for so much. It should come as no surprise that
there are hidden fees in the fine print, like "may destroy the Earth."
Cheap energy was always a Faustian pact.

There are lots of good reasons to build reactor tokamaks, but cheap
energy isn't one of them. Fusion would be a great power source for space
exploration; the fuel is everywhere, you don't have to worry as much
about radiation, and you get your vacuum pumping for free. Sometime
soon, I think we'll do just that. But for now, I simply refuse to grind
through all that horrible mathematics just so Cody McFuckhead can leave
his X-Box running while he goes on spring break.

This is actually a delightful discovery. As long as I was getting my
understanding of the energy situation from media sources, it looked very
very grim. Things look totally different once you become conversant in
the ways we make, transport and use energy. Climate change is a real
crisis and a real problem, but the solution is anything but rocket
science : Bulldoze all coal-fired power plants, and forbid the
construction of new ones. Do it on a nice predictable schedule, and let
utility prices rise just at a pace that allows people to keep up with
the adjustments they have to make. Provide targeted aid where it's
needed, like weatherizing and insulating houses for low income families.
Space it out over ten years, and start with the utility markets that can
adjust the fastest.

Bulldozing our coal fired plants would cut America's carbon emissions in
half, an only sacrifice about 27% of our generating capacity. If
organized carefully, utility prices would rise to less than \$0.40 a
kilowatt hour, and then fall to near previous levels as conservation
measures come on line. Why is that so scary? We don't suffer from a lack
of alternative energy, we suffer from a lack of *balls*.

I thought about this a lot over the summer. Obama's victory finally gave
me the clear concience to change direction. The newspwpers are filled
with hand-wringing about the budget deficit, but I'm more concerned
about America's chutzpah deficit. Obama might not be able to fix the
budget anytime soon, but he's already recapitalizing our country with a
desperately needed infusion of guts.

I was always interested in the computational side of physics, and so a
shift to computational biology is not as big a shift as I'd feared,
especially since I am only just starting. It's a different world, and
I'm already starting to feel that it's a better fit for me.

Energy has always fascinated me. "Follow the money" was Mark Felt's
advise to Bob Woodward during Watergate. If you want to understand
politics, economics and history, money is the skeleton that gives shape
to events. The currency of the universe is energy. It is the specie of
all things from galaxies to microbes. If you want to understand the
physical world, you follow the energy.

The energy balance sheets seem to contradict the idea that we have a
crisis of power generation. Quite the contrary; they indicate a massive
glut. That in itself raises other questions. For example, how has this
glut of cheap energy distorted our economy? How will the end of this
glut change our economy?

I'm not an economist, and I don't want to be one. In any event,
following the energy leads to other more interesting questions. How has
the flow of energy shaped us? A photon strays into the waiting
chloroplast, ultimately making a sugar molecule. The molecule becomes
part of the meal of a gazelle. The gazelle and a hunter sprint together
through a blazing sunset over the Rift Valley a hundred millennia ago.
We owe our existence to a wrinkle in the ledger books of the planetary
energy accountancy. How does that work?

Things are looking up.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/guts.jpg)

