Title: Say it with us : Another open letter to the Chancellor
Date: 2011-11-23 02:05:22
Category: general
Slug: say-it-us-another-open-letter-chancellor
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: california, davis
Summary: 


Dear Chancellor Katehi,

I know this joins a growing list of open letters addressed to you, but
you will find that this one really is addressed to you, rather than at
you.

On Saturday, I signed the petition for your resignation. After this
evening's townhall meeting, I withdrew my signature. You've restored
some of my confidence in your ability to lead this campus, although
reservations remain. The way I see it, you have two choices; lead, or
resign. I would prefer you that lead.

Unfortunately, it seems that you are not getting the best advice in that
regard. I offer these thoughts in the hope that they will point the way.

Sometimes, it is necessary to break a small rule in order to protect a
more important rule. Civil disobedience is not disregard for rules in
general; it is a statement about the relative importance of two rules
that are, or have become contradictory. The Civil Rights rights movement
broke many local ordinances and state laws, but this was done in order
to push the country into compliance with the Fifth and Fourteenth
amendments of the United States Constitution. This is a proud and
honorable part of American history, and has been a model for tremendous
positive change around the world.

The Occupy protests belong to this tradition; they are peacefully but
deliberately breaking a small law, in this case, ordinances against
camping, in order to protect the country from the *existential threat*
of economic nihilism. UC Davis was occupied by its students because they
object to its destruction.

You spoke powerfully this evening about the burning of universities and
libraries in Greece. "No one has the right to destroy the public's
property," is how I think you put it. I am absolutely in agreement. I
believe it is indeed your duty as chancellor to protect *this* campus,
because there are indeed anarchists who are very eager to burn it down.
However, the anarchists who threaten UC Davis are not camping on the
quad tonight. They are in Sacramento and Washington D.C.

One of the most difficult problems in politics is building coalitions.
You are always divided from your natural allies by social boundaries.
Race, religion, age, region, class and gender create boundaries to
mutual comprehension. Professors are separated from students by the
roles each must play in the classroom, and administrators are separated
from both professors and students by billowing layers of university
bureaucracy.

You have fought for this campus in Sacramento and Washington, and you
have seen just how frustrating and lonely it is to fight for public
education these days. You clearly understand how important places like
UC Davis are for the future of this country. But on Friday, your
officers used chemical weapons on people who were engaged in the very
same fight.

So, let me make a suggestion. Don't just apologize. Don't just seek to
heal and muddle forward. The panels, investigations, reports and
meetings you discussed this evening are all important positive things,
and by all means proceed with them. However, you must know that they
will not save this campus from the fire that is coming.

Instead, look across the divide and recognize Occupy UC Davis for what
it is; the banner of your true allies. They are the infantry in the
battle to save public education. Join them. Next time you walk the halls
of Congress to fight for this campus, don't just bring a few token
students. *Bring an army.*

The past few days have made it painfully clear that while you can be
quite articulate, you are not a skilled politician or tactician. This
sits in stark contrast to the students, who have frankly run circles
around you. If you're willing to fight for us, your errors can and will
be forgiven. However, if you are going to be an effective advocate for
this campus, you will need to employ the skills you have, and find
trustworthy friends to help when you are out of your element. An
alliance of the Chancellor's office and the student movement would be
much greater than the sum of its parts, and would certainly be more
productive than continuing to antagonize one another. If you want that
alliance, you are going to have ask for it in the language of mass
protest; with symbols, not words.

You will find that there is plenty of room on the quad for another tent.
There could be no symbol more unambiguous than joining the students in
committing this trivial infraction. The world is watching.

Whose university? Our university. Say it with us, Chancellor.

Russell Neches\
 Graduate student, Microbiology\
 UC Davis
