Title: Sense
Date: 2006-11-02 19:45:17
Category: general
Slug: sense
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: teevee, internet, politics
Summary: 


I almost hate to admit that I heard them from Slashdot, but there are
three bits of good news today.

First, Viacom's Comedy Central has announced that it will [allow YouTube
to continue hosting clips from it's
programs](http://arstechnica.com/news.ars/post/20061101-8126.html) (like
the Daily Show). This is an important step forward for a major copyright
holder. Viacom is demonstrating that it may be developing a new
understanding of the role of copyright: They are beginning to understand
that copyrights are for making money, not for asserting control. In
bygone years, control of the material was *essential* for making money.
Bootleggers used to take a big bite out of author's revenues. In order
to see a profit from their writing, Voltare and Jonathan Swift had to
take extraordinary measures, such as writing in secret, hiring armed
guards to transport manuscripts, and taking terrible financial risks by
borrowing money to finance huge first printings. They knew that if a
book was successful, the first printing would probably be the only
profitable printing, and that bootleggers would quickly flood the market
with poorly-transcribed counterfeits. The poor quality of the bootleg
editions was often incorrectly attributed to the author -- most readers
having never seen the original edition -- and so bootlegging was also a
threat to critical success. Copyright gave authors very necessary legal
means of protecting themselves from bootleggers, and without it, most
literature would have been impossible.

Oddly enough, digital reproduction and distribution of media over he
Internet has pretty much killed the bootleggers. The dynamics the
publishing business has fundamentally changed, and the 18th century view
of copyright, that profits are predicated on control, is becoming
increasingly inappropriate. There is a lot of anxiety among copyright
holders about this. Digital Rights Management and the Digital Millennium
Copyright Act are aimed at preserving the 18th century publishing
business model. This is understandable, given how much wonderful stuff
the system brought into the world by making it possible for authors to
make a living by publishing their work. It makes sense not to want to
abandon it.

However, it also doesn't make sense to hold onto an idea that is no
longer operative. If Viacom is willing to let people share clips of its
shows on YouTube, perhaps this is an indication that the company sees a
different way of making money that *doesn't* rely on the assumption that
profits are predicated on control. Hopefully, they are right, and this
assuages people's anxieties about re-thinking our copyright laws.

The second bit of good news is that there are [rumblings from people at
Microsoft are growing unhappy with their relationship with the People's
Republic of China](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/6102180.stm).
I've puzzled by the simple-mindedness of the arguments in favor of doing
business in China. Yes, it's potentially a huge market. Yes, there are
certain advantages bestowed upon the first business to enter a market.
However, most of this "market" remains in desperate poverty, and is
probably more interested in basic sanitation, education and nutrition
than in buying our products. China is also governed by a brutal and
occasionally genocidal dictatorship that is often openly hostile to
American interests.

If I were the CEO of an American company, especially a technology
company, it would take more than just the vague opportunity of accessing
a large, untapped market to convince me to do business in China. I would
be immediately skeptical of the opportunity on the grounds that most
people in China still do not make enough money to pay even a small
fraction of the the American price of my products. Unless I'm willing to
sell my product for a tenth or a hundredth of the American price, my
customers would be limited to city-dwellers, and of those, only the
relatively elite. Most of China is, and will remain for a long time, an
intermittently hostile third world country. I very much hope that things
will get better for the people of China, but for now, the reality is
that it's a tough place to find a profit.

So, the likely financial benefits are not so great. The potential
downsides, especially morally and politically, are huge. I would remind
Microsoft of the position in which IBM found itself in 1941, having done
a brisk business with Germany for years. It was with IBM's Hollerith
punch cards that Germany identified, tracked and ultimately murdered
millions of people. Now, imagine that you are a programmer working for
Microsoft. You learn that Microsoft Sales gave the Chinese intelligence
services a great deal on five thousand licenses of the program you
write. The licenses are for a new unit which uses your software to hunt
down journalists and labor organizers, and have them imprisoned or
executed.

That's not far fetched. That is *actually happening*. If I were that
programmer, I would be very, very uncomfortable with my role in making
life just that much more miserable for people unfortunate enough to live
under the PRC. If I were the CEO, I would be very wary of the damage my
company's reputation would suffer if it were seen to be enabling human
rights abuses. Never mind the very real risk of prosecution if there was
more than just a perception of enabling behavior.

So, if Microsoft is giving this some serious thought, I applaud them.
When I was a sophomore in high school, the "hot idea" in the policy
debate tournaments in which I competed was Constructive Engagement. It
seemed plausible; we will influence China by cultural and economic
means, and bring about democratic changes by these means rather than
direct diplomacy or containment. The trouble was that Constructive
Engagement has been used as blanket justification for any and all trade
dealings with China. The other trouble is that China's leaders, however
oppressive, are extremely smart, and have exploited the idea of
Constructive Engagement to their maximum advantage. Which is to say,
they've gladly accepted from us whatever strengthens state authority,
and declined what would undermine it. It is also much more difficult for
American culture to influence China to the extent that it has influenced
other places. China has a very strong indigenous commercial culture
which is much, much older than America's. McDonald's and Levi's don't
have any ideas to offer that Chinese customers and businesspeople
haven't known about for a hundred generations. The success of
Constructive Engagement is predicated on the gradual replacement of
aspects of their culture with aspects of ours. It won't work for the
simple reason that China already *has* a culture, and they seem to like
it just fine. The problem isn't Chinese culture; the problem is stupid
ideas from 19th century Germany exploited by a 20th century genocidal
maniac who is now idolized by 21st century totalitarian fuck-heads who
are busily crushing the ambitions of a billion and a quarter ordinary
people.

That's the problem.

The third bit of hopeful news is that [Microsoft an Novel are forming a
partnership](http://online.wsj.com/public/article/SB116249026689311557-helTbrheLKgbaJ5iO5z40ZFCiOs_20061109.html?mod=blogs).
It's about time that Microsoft quit trying to rub Linux out of existence
and start looking at it as a platform for which they could be selling
copies of Microsoft Office. They haven't announced anything like Office
for Linux, but this is one step closer.

That, plus the polls heading into the election, give me a bit of hope
that maybe sanity will prevail after all, at least for a few things.
