Title: Spoon to Bench: A field DNA processing gadget review
Date: 2011-09-30 01:24:01
Category: general
Slug: spoon-bench-field-dna-processing-gadget-review
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: science, grad, school, davis, eisenlab, metagenomics, research, genomics
Summary: 


In my previous article, I outlined [my plans for sequencing a very large
number of
metagenomes](http://vort.org/2011/09/19/how-sequence-10000-metagenomes-3d-printer/).
Assuming that works, there also the problem of actually *getting* the
samples in the first place. [Aaron Darling](http://secretmicrobe.org/)
likes to begin the story of metagenomics by saying, "It all begins with
a spoon..."

So, how do you get the microbes from the spoon to the laboratory?

One of the things I learned from my experience in Kamchatka was just how
tricky collecting samples in the field really is. From lining up
permissions and paperwork, to dealing with cantankerous Customs
officials, to avoiding getting mauled by bears, the trip from the spoon
to the bench is fraught with difficulties. If you mess it up, you either
don't get to do any science or you'll end up doing science on spoiled
samples.

And then there is the DNA extraction. My lab mate Jenna published a
paper last year where she created synthetic communities from cultured
cells, and then examined how closely metagenomic sequencing reproduced
that community. She found that the community representation was heavily
skewed, but that [the DNA extraction methodology was critically
important](http://www.plosone.org/article/info:doi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0010209).
Because it was very difficult to know how well the extraction process
was going to work on hot spring sediment, [Albert
Colman's](http://geosci.uchicago.edu/people/colman.shtml) group
basically brought every DNA extraction kit they could lay hands on to
Kamchatka. Also, they brought a whole lab with them; a 900-watt BioSpec
bead beater (that almost killed our generator), a centrifuge, mini-fuge,
a brace of pipetters, gloves, tips, tubes, tube racks, and a lab
technician to run the show (see my [Uzon Day
Four](http://vort.org/2010/08/19/uzon-day-four/) post to see a little of
that; also, most of the of heavy crates in the photos).

Albert, Bo and Sarah really did an excellent job pulling all of this
together, but it was *hard*. Watching them (and helping them where I
could) got me to think very carefully about how *I* want to conduct my
field research. One thing is for sure; as much as I respect our BioSpec
bead beater, I am not going to carry it into the field. Period. In fact,
if I can possibly manage it, I am going to restrict my supplies and
equipment to what I can carry in a daypack.

I'm still working on how I will do water sampling, but I think I might
have found a solution to sediment sampling at the ASM meeting in New
Orleans. Zymo Research just came out with a line of field DNA extraction
kits that are [intended specifically for field
collection](http://www.zymoresearch.com/asm). The idea is pretty
straight-forward; they combined a DNA stabilization buffer with a cell
lysis buffer, and made a portable, battery-operated bead beater to go
with it.

It's super cool, but I hemmed and hawed for a few months after ASM. I
was a little suspicious of my own judgement; the system includes a cool
gadget, and so of course I wanted it. I spent a month reading protocols
and tinkering around before I finally decided that if the system works
the way Zymo claims, it's just about the best thing for my purposes.
What clinched it was re-reading Jenna's paper, which clearly shows the
importance of thorough cell disruption.

So, I finally decided that I had to give it a try, and that's what this
article is about. If you like, you can think of it as a parody of the
tedious gadget reviews on Gizmodo and Engadget, with maybe a dollop or
two of Anandtech's penchant for brain-liquefying detail.

I guess this wouldn't be proper gadget review unless I started with a
meticulous series of photos documenting the unboxing. So, uh, here are
the boxes.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/zymo_boxes.jpg)

The big one contains the sample processor, and the two smaller ones
contain 50 DNA extraction mini-preps each. I'm going to leave the
mini-prep kits sealed for now, since I'm going to use them for my field
work. Zymo provides two DNA extraction mini-kits with the sample
processor, so I'm going to use those to test out the system.

Underneath the documentation (directions are for suckers) and the
mini-kits, there is the sample processor, a charging station, a 12 volt
lithium ion battery pack, and an international power adapter. They also
provide some little disks, which I think are for using with conical
tubes (they recommend using skirted tubes, since conical tubes can
shatter), and a couple of pairs of earplugs.

The earplugs turned out to be... prescient.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/zymo_box_open.jpg)

The sample processor itself is an modified [Craftsman Hammerhead Auto
Hammer](http://www.sears.com/shc/s/p_10153_12605_00911818000P?prdNo=10&blockNo=10&blockType=G10).
Upside? I can buy extra batteries from Sears! Downside? Seeing the
\$71.99 pricetag from Sears really makes Zymo's \$900 pricetag hurt. Our
super-powerful bench-top BioSpec bead beater is only about twice that.

When I asked, Zymo said that they've actually modified some of the
internals of the Crafstman tool, but this might have just been to
discourage me from traipsing off to the hardware store to buy some PVC
pipe fittings and a hacksaw. Experience tells me, though, that I could
easily fritter away \$800 worth of time replicating their engineering.
OK, \$700. It's a really nice international power adapter.

I was a little disappointed to note that the Craftsman part is made in
China. Not that I have anything against things being made in China, but
I was under the impression that Craftsman was an American brand. It's a
little like discovering that a jar of authentic-seeming salsa is made in
New Jersey, or something. I'm sure they make perfectly good salsa in New
Jersey. Nevertheless, I have a deep-seated belief that salsa should be
made in a Southwestern state by grandmothers who each know five hundred
thousand unique salsa recipes, and Craftsman tools should be made in
Pennsylvania or West Virginia by guys who wear blue overalls and carry
their lunches in pails.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/zymo_processor_debris.jpg)

OK, so maybe I do have something against everything being manufactured
in China. While using the sample processor in the lab, it suddenly made
a very loud *click* that I hadn't heard before. When I looked carefully,
I noticed that there was a piece of metal debris caught in the motor
vent. It seems to be made out of aluminum (it's not ferromagnetic). My
guess is that this is debris from the manufacturing process, not a
broken part of the device. I shook out two other smaller pieces, but
lost them before I could photograph them. It looks like the three pieces
are part of a square. Most likely this is the remains of an improperly
handled punch-out, like a metal version of a paper chad. As you can see,
it got kicked around inside the motor housing until it was ejected into
the vent. I think Craftsman (or their subcontractor) should get the
blame for this, rather than Zymo.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/zymo_processor.jpg)

Here is the soil/fecal mini-kit. Each prep uses three sets of spin
columns. The bead bashing tubes, as they are labeled, are in the upper
right, along with two tubes of lysis/stabilization buffer and a tube of
elution buffer.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/zymo_soil_minikit.jpg)

The protocol says to add the sample first, and then add 750ml of
lysis/stabilization buffer, and then bead-beat. But... then you would
have to bring a p1000 and tips along with you. No thanks. The sample
tubes and the beads had better be chemically stable, or they'd wreck
everything. So, I aliquated the buffer into the bead tubes before
leaving the lab, and left the p1000 behind. Zymo includes some very
fancy spin columns with this kit; they have their own caps, and little
nubs on the flowthrough channels that you need to snap off before you
use the columns. I've not encountered anything quite like these.

The final step of the kit includes these green-capped columns that are
pre-filled with buffer. I wasn't expecting any liquid to be in them, and
so of course I spilled the first one on my foot. Don't do that.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/zymo_spin_column.jpg)

So, I took a little miniature field expedition to the exotic environs of
the [Putah Creek Riparian
Reserve](http://daviswiki.org/Putah_Creek_Riparian_Reserve) to try this
out. It didn't take long to find a place that promised to have plenty of
microbes.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/zymo_mud_spoon.jpg)

Here's a soil sample before processing.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/zymo_sample_before_processing.jpg)

recommend a minimum of 30 seconds). Usually it seems to work fine, but
occasionally the tube explodes and splatters mud and buffer all over the
inside of the lysis chamber.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/zymo_broken_tube.jpg)

The exploding tube problem appears be caused by grit preventing the
threads from closing correctly. In other words, it was my fault. Be
extra careful to get the dirt actually *inside* the tube. Here's what
it's supposed to look like.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/zymo_processed_tube.jpg)

After processing, the samples are noticeably warm. If you are going to
process for much longer than 45 seconds, I suggest you stop and let the
sample cool for a few minutes before continuing.

Here are the yields I measured for the mini-kit preps (minus the tube
that exploded), eluted into 100 &mu;L of buffer.

<center>
  -------------- -------------
  Source         Yield
  Potted plant   80.6 &mu;g/mL
  River muck     0.669 &mu;g/mL
  River muck     1.13 &mu;g/mL
  River muck     0.595 &mu;g/mL
  -------------- -------------

</center>
I messed up the extraction protocol a little bit (and I used too much
elution buffer at the end), but still got enough DNA to work with. Not
too shabby for a first try.

I decided I had to throw these samples and DNA away because I don't
actually have permission to use samples collected on UC Davis's campus.
That's also why I'm not showing a gel.
