Title: The nieve <i>Economist</i>
Date: 2006-05-22 21:22:00
Category: general
Slug: the-nieve-i-economist-i
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: news, commentary
Summary: 


I've read *The Economist* for twelve years now, since I was a freshman
in high school. When I first picked it up, it was a fount of knowledge;
not only did their articles pack more ideas and data about more subjects
into every column inch than I'd ever seen, but they had a way of looking
at the world to which the local newspaper seemed oblivious. Every
newspaper reports on the important, complicated things going on in the
world, but to most newspapers, trade embargoes, interest rates, current
account deficits, leveraged debt, and currency reserves are eldritch
mysteries to be left to experts who furnish perfunctory prognostication
that the editorial staff may then broadcast across the backmatter of the
business section like seed stock over a parking lot.

But to *The Economist* such matters were far from mysterious; they were
quantifiable, they could be compared and contrasted with other periods
in history, tested against theories, and many gallons of ink could be
exhausted discussing their causes and consequences. Arguments were
constructed, defended, and sustained or vanquished. It was weirdly
exciting to read. After trying to wring even basic comprehension out of
the starvation rations offered by the newspapers, reading *The
Economist* was a bit of a guilty pleasure. It felt as if some careless
adult had accidentally let it slip into my hands, and I held the recipe
for a brew of terrible power.

Since then (I was fourteen), I've done a bit of growing up, but sadly it
seems that the venerable *Economist* has been simultaneously
diminishing. This is most obvious when the topic of politics comes up --
and it always does. The great sages that write for the weekly can't seem
to avoid swallowing both their feet.

For more a century and a half, *The Economist* has been championing its
brand of classical liberalism -- free trade, civil liberties,
representative government, and cultural pluralism -- on the theory that
these ideas work in concert to bring about the greatest prosperity for
all. Broadly speaking, they are right on the money. Where *The
Economist* goes wrong is when they try to ascertain which politicians
agree with them, and therefor for which politicians should they cheer.
Here, they are but babes in the woods. You see, politicians *lie* about
what they believe, the rascals! After 163 years in continuous
publication, *The Economist* remains innocent to this sad fact.

To me, the rather shocking naivet&eacute; of *The Economist* is most apparent
when they cover America. Perhaps they are uniformly naive, and I am
merely detecting the divergence from sound thinking where it is most
obvious to me. The mistake isn't in their data or their research -- they
do a great job there. The mistake happens long before any data has been
collected, articles written, or rebuttals penned. It might sound
something like this: "My good man, what party supports free trade? Oh,
goodness me, of coursre. The conservative party! Who's the conservative
party in your little country? Oh, jolly good. We'll write some nice
articles about them."

In 1922, that might have made some sense. The conservatively-aligned
Republican Party, for example, once stood for free trade, civil
liberties, representative government, and cultural pluralism. That was
back when they were the party of Lincoln, emancipation, and unfettered
trade. It may come as something of a shock, but a few things have
changed since 1922. By 1980, the last "liberal" principle the Republican
party stood for was free trade. But instead of curtailing the
government's meddling in the private sector, Ronald Reagan presided over
a huge expansion in government subsidies, in the form of peace-time
defense spending, financed with borrowed money. Our current president is
cut from the same cloth -- though while Reagan's voodoo economics was a
suit that no self-respecting economist would don, George W. Bush is its
clippings.

Nevertheless, *The Economist* earnestly cranks out article after article
supporting the Lesser Bush. Why? Because Bush says he's for small
government, which is about as close to professed support for free-market
capitalism as you're going to get from conservatives nowadays. Oh, sure,
he's against all those other important principles for which *The
Economist* stands. When it comes to wiretapping millions of innocent
Americans, torturing people, imprisonment without trial, gerrymandering,
the injection of religion into law and jurisprudence, massive deficit
spending, undermining science, corruption, and blowing hundreds of
billions of dollars on subsidies to his personal favorites among
industry, George Bush is your man. But he *says* he's for small
government, so *The Economist* swallows their pride, and frequently
their feet, and stands by their man.

This week, for example, their article on immigration appears with the
following byline: "George Bush is successfully wooing public opinion to
his balanced proposals for managing immigration." If the polls are any
indication, George Bush isn't wooing anyone. The reality is that his own
party is furious that he isn't planning on the mass deportation of
illegal immigrants (as the article goes on to mention), and everyone
else seems to be wondering if his immigration plan is the result of a
relapse into alcoholism.

To his credit, George Bush is consistent about one thing. When
hurricanes destroy American cities, he's more than happy to let "the
market" sort things out. When it comes to disaster recovery, George Bush
steadfast in his efforts to keep the government out of people's lives.

In conclusion: Dear *Economist*, I'm very sorry to tell you this, but
politicians lie. They even lie to *you*. I know it's sad. Please don't
cry. It's OK. We understand that this comes as a great shock, but try to
be strong. We're all here for you.
