Title: The Metro
Date: 2007-08-11 23:09:30
Category: general
Slug: the-metro
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: los, angeles, metro, train, bus, transportation, traffic
Summary: 


While I was on jury duty last week, I rode the train from Pasadena to
the courthouse in Downtown LA every morning. One of the best things
about jury duty, I think, was riding the train. I took the Gold Line
from the Lake Street station in Pasadena, switched to Red Line at Union
Station, and then switched to the Blue Line at 7th Street, and hopped
off at Grand, less than a block from the courthouse. The whole trip took
took about 40 minutes when I caught a local train at Lake Street, or
about 28 minutes if I was lucky enough to catch the Express. Driving
from Pasadena during rush hour would have been... excruciating. At least
an hour and twenty minutes.

I miss the train. It was quiet (except, inexplicably, for the tunnel
leaving 7th Street), fast, and comfortable. I was always able to find a
seat, even during peak hours. The stations are nice. I got a lot of
reading done, and the scenery is interesting. If anything, my opinion of
Angelenos has improved considerably from the random sample I
encountered.

Now that I've been released from the jury, my trips to UCLA in West Los
Angeles are by car. The train doesn't go here, and the buses from
Downtown are slow, infrequent and astonishingly crowded. My most recent
ride on the 720 bus featured a fifteen minute interval smashed
face-to-face into the enormous pot belly of a 400-pound black man, who
didn't seem to enjoy the experience any more than I did. No amount of
shuffling and begging ones pardon were sufficient to disengage skin
contact. The only solution was to stare out of opposite windows and wait
for the rumbling glacier of sweat, flesh and steel to reach its
destination. Riding the bus *sucks*.

West LA needs to get with the program, or it's going to become a slum.
All the interesting new development in Los Angeles is happening
Downtown, and the [new zoning
changes](http://www.latimes.com/news/printedition/front/la-me-downtown8aug08,1,3600288.story?coll=la-headlines-frontpage)
are only going to accelerate that. Running the Red Line down the
Wilshire corridor to Ocean Boulevard is only a start. The [proposal to
turn Pico and Olympic into paired one-way
streets](http://www.smmirror.com/MainPages/DisplayArticleDetails.asp?eid=6011)
is utterly idiotic, but understandable given that people in West LA
would probably chew off their leg before allowing a even a single
precious lane to be sacrificed for a light rail project.
