Title: The Clinton Puzzle
Date: 2007-12-28 19:09:06
Category: general
Slug: the-clinton-puzzle
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: george, bush, clinton, bill, popularity
Summary: 


A friend of mine has asked if I can explain why Bill Clinton enjoyed,
and continues to enjoy, relatively high popularity despite the troubles
he faced in office. Obviously, one can only speculate about workings of
another's mind, but in this case I think it may be possible to speculate
with some measure of confidence.

The first possible explanation is that there are simply more Democrats
than Republicans.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/voter_affiliation.png)

However, this doesn't really explain very much by itself. The glib
talk-show explanation of Bill Clinton's popularity is that the economy
was good during the Clinton years, ergo Clinton was popular. End of
story.

Of course, the president does not have much direct influence on the
health of the broader economy, and it is not unreasonable to suppose
that most Americans who fondly remember Mr. Clinton's tenure are aware
of this. A more nuanced explanation is required.

It will probably come as no surprise that I have my own theory. We are,
after all, speculating on the thoughts and feelings of millions of total
strangers, so my theory is probably as good as any, or perhaps at best
slightly more plausible. At least it does not suffer from the obvious
bogosity of the it-was-a-good-economy theory. Since theories are
supposed to have names, I will name my theory *Popularity Due to Reduced
Rate of Disaster*.

The theory goes like this. While the president does not have very much
influence over the immediate overall health of the economy, they can
exercise a large amount of influence over specific aspects of it.
Particularly, the White House can be enormously effective at wrecking
things. You don't need thermodynamics to tell you that it is easier to
make a mess than to clean one up.

So, why is Bill Clinton relatively popular, and George W. Bush so
unpopular? If you look for explanations in ideas and politics, you might
be able to formulate some sort of explanation based on how much
Americans tend to agree with the thinking of the current and former
occupant of the White House. This sort of analysis is the bread and
butter of TV pundits. Happily, most Americans don't think like the
gasbags on TV, and so the ideological analysis offered there is very
likely wrong.

I think it is more reasonable to suppose that Americans draw conclusions
from the evidence that they encounter in their own lives, and have a
mostly casual or academic interest in aggregate effects like GNP growth
or the nominal inflation rate. This is probably why so many Americans
think we are in a recession even though the GNP is growing: If you're
working hard but struggling financially, then the economy sucks, and
you're not likely to feel otherwise upon hearing that GNP is growing and
the nominal rate of inflation is low.

So, when a president wrecks part of the economy, it may not register
significantly in macroeconomic diagnostics, but it may have a big impact
on how large numbers of individual people feel. I think that this is
probably the most plausible model for popular opinion, at least as a
first-order-approximation. A person may be ideologically inclined to
agree with a president, but if that president does something that
directly harms that person, I don't think the ideological agreement
matters very much.

Looking back on the Clinton presidency, it is difficult to point to
anything remarkably wonderful that he did, especially when set alongside
other multi-term 20th century Democratic presidents (e.g., FDR). But
perhaps more importantly, it is also difficult to point to anything
remarkably bad, either. The worst thing Mr. Clinton did, most people
agree, was have "sexual relations" with a consenting adult, and then
lied about it. Sure, it was sort of embarrassing, but it had no impact
whatsoever on any American, save for the dozen or so people with a
personal stake in the matter. Americans came to the sensible conclusion
that it wasn't really any of their business and wasn't really very
important, and so the dual impeachment efforts in Congress and in the
media were spectacularly unpopular.

When Mr. Clinton was still in office, the friend who posed this question
remarked that the aspect of the Lewinsky incident that bothered him most
was that Mr. Clinton's brief affair happened "on the public dime" and on
public property. These are legitimate points, but one should keep in
mind that the man was working sixty to eighty hours a week. Even if we
deduct the time wasted on the affair, the public still got a fantastic
bargain in terms of dollars paid per hour of presidential work,
especially when contrasted with Mr. Bush's short work week and frequent,
lengthy vacations. *Of course* the celebrated liaison happened in the
Oval Office; Bill Clinton worked longer hours than a galley slave.

As far as practical impacts on individual lives, Mr. Clinton was clearly
not a very bad president. In some moderately important ways, he managed
to do some real good, but that probably isn't why he's popular. The real
reason, I think, is the sharp contrast with the presidents before and
after. George W. Bush has managed to wreck an extraordinary number of
things. For example cities New Orleans and Biloxi, *habeas corpus*, the
first, second, fourth, firth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth
amendments to the Constitution, America's international reputation, the
nation of Iraq, the World Bank, the Department of Justice, an so on.
While Mr. Bush has not actually *destroyed* any of these things, and I
think they each will eventually be rebuilt, the damage done nevertheless
is real. It has had real, widespread impacts on the lives of ordinary
Americans.

Rather than speaking generally about these things, I think it would be
more illustrative to delve into three anecdotes that I think are
representative of the sort of damage that happened before and after Mr.
Clinton's presidency. Each of these events has caused substantial
material harm to individual Americans.

### Skid Row

Since I live in Los Angeles, I am practically compelled to mention the
death-blow Ronald Reagan dealt to America's the mental health care
system. As governor of California, he called for the firing of 3700
mental health employees from the Department of Mental Hygiene in 1969.
The California legislature reduced the layoffs to 2600 employees and
began construction of new treatment centers to replace the old-fashioned
residential hospitals that were to be closed. In the resulting
departmental turmoil, tens of thousands of very sick people were
*literally dumped* onto the streets of California's cities. Most of them
stayed on the streets. As the Vietnam War chewed through the
draft-eligible population in the following years, a disproportionate
number of these new mentally ill homeless were veterans suffering from
what we would now call PTSD.

To give you an idea of why this screw-up has had such permanent
consequences, you have to remember the time period in which all of this
was happening. This was the early 1970s, a period of weak economic
growth extremely high inflation. It was very hard on middle class
families. If you were a discharged mental patient or a veteran with
brain trauma, it was simply impossible to get by. The network of
treatment centers has turned out to be almost completely impotent.

When Reagan became president, he duplicated these policies on a national
scale. Mentally ill people flooded into city centers across the country.
Many of these cities are lethally cold in the winter months, so many
mental hospitals and cities evidently used the last dribbles of federal
money to buy one-way train tickets for their patients. They sent them to
the one city that everyone knew was nice and warm in the wintertime, and
already had a big enough homeless population that no one would notice a
few more: Los Angeles. If you look at the distribution of LA's homeless
population, it is still [clustered near the rail
terminus](http://homeless.cartifact.com/).

Before Reagan, Los Angeles didn't have a very significant homeless
population. Today, it has [a permanently homeless population of 82,000
people](http://www.laalmanac.com/social/so14.htm), and at some point
during the year, and additional 254,000 Los Angeles residents are
homeless for some period of time.

The evence is even more offensive upon revisiting the reason it was
carried out. The mental hospitals were shut down because Reagan believed
that they were inefficient, and that it would be simpler to scrap the
system and build a new one than to attempt reforms. All of this human
misery was for the sake of speeding up the realization of a relatively
insignificant cost savings.

### Stranded at the Airport

My second example, again from Reagan, is the Air Traffic Control system.
The Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization went on strike to
protest long hours, low pay and unsafe working conditions. Let me repeat
that last one. The air traffic controllers went on strike to protest
unsafe working conditions. Not unsafe for themselves, but unsafe for the
traveling public. It is the only example that I know of where a trade
union has gone on strike for the sake of public safety. Reagan ordered
them back to work, and when they refused, he fired them en mass, and
banned them from government service forever.

The fallout of Reagan's decision has left an indelible mark on America's
transportation system. The positions left open by the fired air traffic
controllers were filled by managers, non-union controllers, and temps.
To decrease the likelihood of accidents, the FAA was forced to enlarge
the minimum safety envelopes around aircraft. With low wages, long
hours, ancient equipment (which hasn't been upgraded since the 1960s),
poor benefits and terrible morale, it's been virtually impossible to
hire new air traffic controllers. So, the conditions that triggered the
strike in the first place have actually gotten worse. Reagan's purge of
air traffic controllers drastically reduced the safety and the
throughput capacity of the entire civil aviation system.

In some very busy airports, this throughput capacity reduction is
substantial. Nearly all airport delays can be ultimately attributed to
congestion at a handful of very busy airports. This congestion is a
consequence of the larger safety envelopes required by the FAA to allow
them to do without the 11,000 highly-trained professionals that it can
neither replace nor re-hire. So, next time you're stuck sitting on the
tarmac or at the gate, you can thank Ronald Reagan for putting
union-busting ahead of public safety and the operational effectiveness
of the FAA.

It's worth noting that both the Teamsters and PATCO endorsed Reagan in
1980.

### Backdating

The last example I will give is somewhat personal and esoteric, but it
is perhaps the most important. Over the last three years, many companies
have been caught doing something called option backdating. The scheme
works like this. An option is an agreement with the issuer of a security
-- in this case, stock certificates issued by the board of directors of
a company -- to either buy or sell the security at a particular price.
Executive compensation packages often contain a basket of options at
various prices. Usually, these options are held in escrow until a
specified date, at which point they are released from escrow. The
recipient may the "exercise" the option, which in this case means either
buying or selling the security at the agreed upon price.

In the case of stock options, boards usually issue options based not on
a price, but rather the at a price on a particular date. The scandal
that has been swirling around a number of companies, including
high-fliers like Apple, is that they issued stock options to their
executives that had price-point dates before their issue dates. An
option is *supposed* to be a security whose value is based on the price
difference between now some point in the future. This is why options are
sometimes called "futures." However, if you issue an option whose value
is based on the difference in price between the price now and some point
in the past, then you you know *exactly* how much the option is worth.
In other words, it's not an option at all; it's cash.

What Apple did, and what hundreds of other companies did between 2002
and 2006, was issue these "backdated" options to their executives. Each
instance of options backdating constitutes three separate acts of fraud
:

1.  It allows the company to directly pay their executives billions of
    dollars in cash, but expense the associated costs as operating
    overhead instead of payroll, thus hiding the actual impact of
    executive compensation from investors.
2.  It allows the companies to avoid paying payroll taxes on this money,
    depriving Social Security and Medicare/Medicaid of billions of
    dollars.
3.  It allows the executives themselves to declare the money thus
    received as capital gains instead of income, on which they pay 22%
    instead of 46%.

The companies who were caught doing this were finally asked to stop
sometime last year. Insofar as I can tell, there has been no substantial
punishment for options backdating yet.

I did not really appreciate the magnitude of this scandal until I talked
about it with my father, who has extensive experience as an entrepreneur
and has served on the boards of several companies. My father started a
company called Teradata (NYSE: TDC). Teradata makes database computers.

My father once explained to me that there were only two entities that
posed a serious threat to his company: IBM, and the Securities and
Exchange Commission. Teradata went after IBM's main business, courting
some of IBM's most lucrative customers. When the company was still
operating out of a grubby little building near the LA airport, they went
toe-to-toe with IBM in the marketplace, and they prospered. My father
was very worried that IBM would do something illegal to destroy his
company, but fortunately, IBM played fair.

As scary as it was duking it out with the largest technology company on
Earth, what *really* scared my father was the Securities and Exchange
Commission. He was absolutely **terrified** that a there would be some
sort of mistake in their accounting, or in their public filings, or in
their communications with investors, that would bring down the wrath of
the SEC. As soon as Teradata was incorporated, he made sure that he had
the best accountants and the best lawyers he could possibly find, and he
demanded absolute perfection from them. My father loathes accounting,
but he spent more time checking the ledgers than on the engineering of
the computer that he himself had invented. That is how scared he was of
the SEC.

That is how scared *everyone* was of the SEC in those days. It was
assumed that even a small error in the corporate accounting would lead
immediately to the destruction of the company and the end of the careers
of everyone involved.

When I was much younger, I once complained that it was unfair for the
SEC to impose such stiff penalties. My father responded angrily, "No,
it's not unfair. Teradata is made out of other people's money." Even
while the ax was hanging over his own neck, my father strongly supported
this strict regulation.

When Teradata was founded, no one would have dared something as shady as
options backdating. They would have been ripped to shreds. So, why did
it happen? Simple. George W. Bush nerfed the SEC. Companies know that
America's financial cops don't have any bullets.

When you look at the credit crunch, the looming subprime disaster, and
the wave of mortgage foreclosures crashing down on America's middle
class, it shouldn't be any surprise how it happened.

### Gamesmanship or statecraft?

Returning to the question at hand, why is it that people like Bill
Clinton? That's easy. He didn't wreck anything. He appointed mostly
competent bureaucrats to lead federal agencies. The ones that weren't
competent got fired. He understood that the president's job is to make
the government work, and he logged eight years of eighty hour weeks to
make sure that it did.

His ideology was not neither inspired nor inspiring, but people like him
anyway. This was the great puzzle that the conservatives who opposed him
have never figured out. Newt Gingrich and Tom DeLay believed that
politics is all about ideas, and as far as campaigns are concerned, they
were right. However, good government is not about ideas. It is about
duty, service and implementation. Government doesn't run on ideas, it
runs on deeds. In that respect, government and politics are very
different activities.

Bill Clinton is popular because he was pretty good at government. Newt
Gingrich, Tom DeLay, George Bush and now the whole Republican Party are
deeply unpopular because, while they are exceptionally good at politics,
they are miserable failures in government. As long as Republicans
continue to confuse politics and government, they will remain puzzled by
Bill Clinton's enduring popularity.
