Title: Thermophiles workshop overview
Date: 2010-08-23 12:27:38
Category: general
Slug: thermophiles-workshop-overview
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: science, grad, school, kamchatka, thermophiles, russia, eisenlab, metagenomics, research
Summary: 


After landing at the airport, we crammed our equipment and ourselves
into a taxi-van, and returned to the little apartment we stayed in
before leaving for Uzon. There's a washing machine there, so we ran as
many loads of laundry as possible.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/after_uzon_sleeping_bags.jpeg) \
 *Back at the apartment in Petropavlovsk, we tried (and mostly failed)
to get the smell of hydrogen sulphide off of us.*

Then next day, we piled into another taxi-van and rode to the [Flamingo
Hotel](http://www.kamchatkatravel.net/eng/hotels.shtml), where the
workshop will start tomorrow.

**Update :** Below is a summary of my favorite talks at the workshop
that I wrote on the flight back to California.

There have been a number of really exciting talks here at the workshop,
and I can't summarize all of them. So, here are a few talks that have
kept me thinking.

### Sergey Varfolomeev : The youngest natural oil on Earth

Carbon-14 dating indicates that Uzon contains petroleum-like oil that is
less than 50 years old. Very similar compounds were obtained by
low-temperature pyrolysis of cyanobacteria and microalgae isolated in
the vicinity to the hydrocarbon sample sites.

### Albert Colman : Chemistry and geobiology of life in hot carbon monoxide

One of the key events in the establishment of our existing ecology was
the development of an oxygen rich atmosphere. This process occurred in
several stages, and one of the key stages marked the end of the [Archean
eon](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Archean). Archean ecosystems are
thought to have included oxygen-producing organisms, but during the
Archean eon there were enough free reducing compounds in the atmosphere,
ocean and soil to consume all the oxygen they produced. The Archean eon
ended when these chemical oxygen sinks were finally overwhelmed, and
oxygen started to build up in the atmosphere. In order to understand how
and why we have an oxygen-rich atmosphere, it is important to understand
how the Earth's atmosphere worked during this period.

Albert and his group are studying the role of carbon monoxide in the
Archean atmosphere. There are a variety of organisms that exist today
(particularly in volcanic environments like Uzon) that grow on carbon
monoxide, and for this reason, the biosphere is usually treated as a
sink for carbon monoxide. However, there are also organisms that produce
carbon monoxide as a waste product, and so the coupling of atmospheric
carbon monoxide to the biosphere in Archean climate models needs to
treat the biosphere as a source *and* a sink to properly capture the
dynamics.

I find all of this to be fascinating. It's very important that we get a
handle on this stuff; mankind has been conducing a huge, uncontrolled
experiment with the Earth's atmosphere since around 1820. Learning about
other such "experiments" in Earth's history (in Archean, by microbes
rather than humans) is pretty important.

### Evengy Nikolaev : Mass spectrometry

I had no idea there were so many kinds of mass spectrometers! I guess
that's what I get for my background in theoretical physics. My
inclination is to write

![](http://vort.org/cgi-bin/mimetex.cgi?f_c=\frac{Bq}{2\pi%20m})

and call it a day. Mass spectrometry, to me at least, has always meant
this :

![Schematic of a basic mass spectrometer.](http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b8/Mass_spectrometer_schematics.png)

If you stick some ions in a constant magnetic field, their orbital
frequencies will depend only on their mass and charge. So, you just aim
your beam of ions through a magnet, and all your ions will segregate out
like colors in a rainbow. Done. High school physics, right? Wrong!

Evengy's talk was like looking up a recipe for pancakes and discovering
that there are breakfast, lunch, tea, and dinner pancakes; that they can
be made from fifty different grains and pulses; and that there are
pancake recipes suitable for every occasion ranging from a quick bite
while driving to work in the morning to the main course of a king's
coronation. That's a lot of mass spectrometry!

### Juergen Wiegel : Interspecies heterogeneity and biogeography of *Thermoanaerobacter uzonensis*

I'm really interested in biogeography generally, and so I was waiting
for this talk. The
[Baas-Becking](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lourens_Baas_Becking)
hypothesis that "everything is everywhere, but the environment selects"
has been one of the key ideas in microbiology. As gene sequencing has
gotten more powerful, it has been possible to test this hypothesis with
increasing confidence. Juergen presented some findings that take another
step toward disproving hypothesis and establishing the importance of
locality in evolution.

Basically, his group at the University of Georgia obtained 16s small
subunit rRNA sequences from *Thermoanaerobacter uzonensis* isolates
collected in different spots in Kamchatka. The collection sites ranged
from a few meters apart to about 300 kilometers. It was found that
divergence among the sequences correlated positively with geographic
distance.

The environment does indeed select, but the Baas-Becking hypothesis only
holds for fuzzy definitions of "everything" and "everywhere."

### Anna Perevalova : Novel thermophilic archaea of order *Fervidicoccales* - diversity, distribution and metabolism

I had been bugging Anna during the field expedition to tell me more
about *Fervidococcus fontis*, which she discovered. *F. fontis* grows
between 55C and 85C, which is an unusually wide range. The genome has
recently been sequenced, and she presented some of the preliminary
results from the annotation.

I still find it mysterious how one sets out to find new species (in this
case, a new genus). Anna works in [Elizaveta Bonch-Osmolovskaya's
lab](http://www.inmi.ru/hyperthermophiles_eng.php) at the Winogradsky
Institute of Microbiology, where they used a technique I'd never heard
of called [Denaturing Gradient Gel
Electrophoresis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Temperature_gradient_gel_electrophoresis)
and a myriad of selective media cultures to coax this organism out of
the woodwork. Pretty hard-core, if you ask me.

### Sergey Gavrilov : Electrochemical potential and microbial community composition of bioelectrochemical systems employed *in situ* in hotsprings of Uzon Caldera

This is a pretty awesome idea. [Microbial fuel
cells](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microbial_fuel_cell) exploit the
fact that cellular metabolism requires the transport of electrons
outside the cell to deposit on acceptor substances, and couple this
process to an electrical circuit. Sergey discussed a modification of
this idea called sediment microbial fuel cell; instead of growing his
microbes in the lab, he carried his cathode and anode out into the field
and stuck them into a sedimentary formation in the environment.

The awesome part of this study is that Sergey isn't just looking for
high power output. He's using the fuel cell to select for
current-producing organisms from a diverse community, and then studying
those organisms. After letting his circuits run for ten days, he found
biofilms growing on the electrodes that had very different community
structure from the controls (same setup, but with an open circuit). It's
basically an enrichment culture that enriches for microbes that like to
make electricity.

### David Bernick : New discoveries in the hyperthermophilic genus *Pyrobaculum* enabled by deep RNA and genome sequencing

It's interesting to see how much fine structure can be found when an
organism is sequenced deeply enough to capture it. David's team is using
massive [Illumina](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illumina_(company))
sequencing to do something like the [Hubble Deep
Field](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hubble_Deep_Field) for an archaeal
genome and its small RNA. They also sequenced a new member of the genus,
*P. oguniense*, and discovered therein a new virus and a number of cool
virus-related genomic features in the host.

### Frank Robb : Lessons learned from sequencing carboxydotrophic bacteria and the race to discover hyperthermophilic cellulases

Frank was the only person at the workshop to give two talks, and they
were both pretty cool. The first talk summarized results presented in a
paper amusingly titled [*'That which does not kill us only makes us
stronger': the role of carbon monoxide in thermophilic microbial
consortia*](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1462-2920.2009.01865.x/abstract).
This work covered a lot of ground, including some compelling evidence
for archaea-to-bacteria lateral gene transfer of chaparonins, as well as
a results showing rapid accumulation of frameshift mutations when *C.
hydrogenoformans* is grown under
[syngas](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syngas), allowing it to grow
rapidly by fixing carbon monoxide from syngas. Syngas is also known as
[wood gas](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wood_gas), a simple intermediate
for converting a variety of biomass feedstocks into usable fuel. If one
wanted to obtain pure hydrogen gas from syngas, an organism that can eat
the carbon monoxide could be handy.

The second talk presented some really interesting work in which a
consortium of one cultured and two novel archaea was isolated from a
thermal spring in Nevada that was able to grow on filter paper at 90C. A
cellulase capable of degrading crystalline cellulose into reducing
sugars at 100C was isolated, and the genes responsible were cloned and
expressed in *E. coli*.

This is also pretty exciting for the biofuels people. One of the
problems with moderate-temperature cellulases is that it's impossible to
keep a huge vat of wet, ground up plants sterile. As soon as cellulase
activity starts putting simple sugars into solution, something will
start to eat the sugars. However, if you conduct the process at
pasteurization temperatures, then you just have to worry about
contamination by hyperthermophiles. So, as long as you keep people like
Frank Robb and Karl Stetter from dropping their used lab equipment into
your processing vat, you should get a nice yield of sugars from the
cellulose without having it all eaten up by pesky yeasts and suchlike.
