Title: They're called principles
Date: 2006-02-16 23:00:00
Category: general
Slug: theyre-called-principles
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: internet
Summary: 


I have some sympathy for Google, Yahoo, Microsoft and Cisco. I really
do. Given [how little America seems to appreciate human rights these
days](http://www9.sbs.com.au/theworldnews/region.php?id=127322&region=6#),
it's difficult to see how the folks running these companies could have
acquired an aversion to the abuse of human rights. In a way, it really
is unfair to expect commercial enterprise to understand or protect the
civic institutions that permit them to prosper. Firms are established
for the singular purpose of making money; it is supposed to be up to the
individual citizen to worry about civic duties like protecting human
rights.

As anyone who has worked in a tech company knows, control of
intellectual property is absolutely key. The critical intellectual
property of tech companies like those sitting before the [Congressional
inquiry](http://wwwc.house.gov/international_relations/) today includes
not just technical information, but brand and reputation. In order to
prosper in this business, corporations must be ruthless about protecting
their intellectual property. However, it is surprising how little
attention is paid to the ethical consequences of this behavior. The
actions required to defend intellectual property include forcing
employees to sign non-disclosure agreements that promise stern legal and
financial reprisal if breached, terminating employees who speak
unfavorably of the company outside of work, and closely monitoring the
correspondence of employees. To prevent brand dilution, companies are
often forced to sue fan groups out of existence, thus humiliating their
most loyal customers. To prevent "piracy," tech companies frequently
cripple their products, making life unpleasant for all their customers.

As industries go, software and other technology products are produced on
a very peculiar revenue model. When a company is making automobiles, or
gasoline, or asparagus, or razor blades, or providing landscaping
services, or operating a fleet of jet aircraft, the company can easily
operate profitably at a variety of scales. Of course, in most cases
there is some advantage to a larger operation -- it costs slightly less
per unit to make 10 million cars than 1 million -- but such advantages
tend to saturate. The profitability of most companies will cease to
improve once their operations reach a certain size. Once this state has
been reached, the incremental cost of producing an additional unit is
linear with the number of units. This is one of the key assumptions that
goes into the theory of a well-behaved market.

For software, this model is turned on its head. Developing a word
processing application costs about the same whether the company sells
ten, ten thousand, or ten million copies. This is even true for much of
the hardware field, since these days a hardware product is typically
nothing more than a platform on which to run a specific piece of
software (Cisco's routers and switches are a good example of this
trend). Thus, staying profitable can be a dangerous game; there is a
critical revenue level below which the business simply cannot survive,
and to support a sophisticated product, this number is often quite high.
In contrast, when revenue falls, a landscaping firm can always shrink to
fit the demand by laying off a few people, and an oil company can always
scale down operations. For this reason, technology companies fear the
idea of their products becoming a commodities above anything else. They
fear commoditization even more than the Sherman Act, the hatred of their
customers, and the stagnation of their particular niche of the
technology industry, the industry as a whole, or even the stagnation of
the whole economy.

Some people criticize them for placing profits over human rights, but I
think this quite misses the point. Cisco, Google, Microsoft and Yahoo!
could each continue to do business in China without bowing to the
demands of its oppressive government. It might require a bit of extra
cleverness, but none of these firms are short on this particular talent.
When one considers how the technology sector behaves in *this* country,
we should hardly be surprised that they are so eager to comply with the
demands of oppressive governments. Culturally speaking, they find more
in common with the civic philosophy of the People's Republic than with
that of the United States.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/Mao-Yahoo_small.png)

