Title: Thoughts on Rome
Date: 2006-07-12 19:50:00
Category: general
Slug: thoughts-on-rome
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: travel
Summary: 


Today, Mimi and I visited the Pantheon again. It's one of the only
surviving original Roman buildings in Rome. As we stood beneath the
great dome, I couldn't help but look up and shudder. Of course, the
American republic was modeled on Rome's. Walking through the bones of
the Roman Empire, my mind keeps drifting to the fate of my own nation.

Rome's sad fate was sealed sometime during its wars with Carthage. When
Carthage wad destroyed, the Romans acquired the lands once controlled by
Carthage -- Spain, Libya, Morocco, Corsica and Sardinia. Carthage was
the center of a trading empire, and so Rome seized a great deal of
wealth through the conquest. The spoils of victory had a destabilizing
effect on Rome's class system, adding domestic chaos to foreign
entanglements. As the Punic Wars dragged on, the military gradually
increased in prominence in Roman society. The Roman institution of the
dictatorship -- an institution that was much feared, and for good reason
-- allowed Julius Cesar to first claim the title of *dictator rei
gerendae causa*, and then *dictator perpetuus*.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/pantheon_dome.jpg)

The moment the Senate voted Cesar *dictator perpetuus*, the Roman
republic was dead. If the Senate had refused, and Cesar had destroyed
it, perhaps the republic could have been re-formed after Cesar's death.
Instead, the republic chose to chain itself to the emperor, and the fate
of leadership without accountability is always inevitable decline. That
is why republics exist in the first place -- they are a hedge against
human vices and vanities.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/us_senate_dome.jpg)

Turning to the American republic, the huge importance of the military in
society throughout the twentieth century is troubling. The domestic
unhappiness (not yet chaos) caused by the uneven distribution of
America's great expansion of prosperity is troubling. The current
executive's efforts to undermine the powers of its coequal branches of
government are troubling, especially since these efforts are justified
in the name of emergency conditions and extraordinary circumstances.

Whenever George Bush talks about "these troubling times" and the "war on
terror," I remember that the Roman republic died so that someone could
wield emergency powers, and fate of Rome itself eventually reflected the
fate of its republic. During the Dark Ages, Rome was essentially
abandoned. Farmers planted fields where the Senate once met.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/pantheon_pedament.jpg)

When I look at the old battered Pantheon, I can't help but hope that
someone will always tend to the paint on the US Capitol. I hope that no
one ever wanders through Washington D.C., snapping pictures of the
awesome bones of a defunct empire. I want Americans to hold their noses
and vote, year after year, for a government that belongs to everyone. I
want Washington to remain forever a mildly contemptible town where
Americans get down to the business of governing, and that it never
becomes the seat of a great empire.

Most of all, I hope that our republic is built of stronger stuff than
Rome's.
