Title: Time to Leave
Date: 2006-11-25 05:42:27
Category: general
Slug: time-to-leave
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: politics
Summary: 


Shiites Iraqis are burning Sunni Iraqis alive with kerosene in
retaliation for multiple coordinated car-bombings that killed hundreds
of people. The al-Sadr faction in in the Iraqi parliament is threatening
to bolt the ruling coalition if Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki even
*meets* with President Bush. This will likely cause the government to
collapse, and there isn't much likelihood that parliament will be able
to form a new government.

I would have called it a civil war a long time ago, but if this level of
violence continues (it will), and if the government collapses (it
probably will sooner or later), then it's *definitely* a civil war. The
Pentagon's claim that it is not already a civil war must be based on
some very technical definition of the term "civil war." For example,
that it's not a civil war until an officially recognized regional
government entity formally declares independence, raises an army, meets
the army of the national government on the battlefield and engages in
conventional warfare. That's how *our* civil war happened. That *isn't*
how most civil wars of the 20th century happened.

Civil wars reflect the societies that wage them. The American Civil War
reflected the antagonism among elements of 19th century American
society, and the Mason-Dixon line, the geographic and cultural fracture
along which the two sides split, was a feature of existing devisions.

The bloodshed in Iraq reflects the divisions in Iraqi society; what is
happening now is *exactly* what skeptics of the invasion warned us would
happen. As you may recall, it was theorized that the only thing holding
Iraq together was the universal fear of Saddam Hussein. It was his
regime alone, and not any sense of national identity, that held the
country together. Removing Saddam from power would be like removing the
iron hoops from a barrel under pressure; with nothing holding the staves
together, the barrel would blow apart. This was the *conventional
wisdom* from the end of the Gulf War until Colin Powell's infamous
presentation to the U.N. Now, we can turn on the news any day and see
that it was right on the money.

This war is our fault, but we are not serving and can not serve any
meaningful positive role in the country now that these events are in
motion. The only humane thing we can do for Iraq is pack up our things
and leave, and promise to never, ever come back. We have been fucking
with the Middle East for too long.
