Title: Travel notes (part 1)
Date: 2008-12-28 02:54:49
Category: general
Slug: travel-notes-part-1
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: chaparral, home, california, transport, financial, crisis, amtrak, train, housing
Summary: 


After almost fifty-some hours riding the train, I have a few impressions
worth sharing. I had a lot of time to think, and a lot of things to
think about, so I'm going to break this up into a couple of posts.

![](http://vort.org/media/images/leaving_la_on_train.jpg)

I expected to get a great deal of work done in that time, and I
accomplished absolutely none of it. Not a single jot. I basically spent
the whole trip either looking out the window, or happily asleep. There
is just too much to look at; breathtaking snow-capped mountains too
numerous to name, scores of towns and a dozen cities, the vast arid
emptiness of New Mexico, lonely volcanic prominences rising from
Euclidean flatness, knots of green trees rioting in pocket valleys
bracketed by sterile sun-blasted volcanic rocks, and the profane,
hideous pointlessness of Texas cities.

The trip was a grand tour of the majestic beauty of our country, and an
industrial colonoscopy showcasing a great deal of what is wrong and
twisted about its economy.

I will spare you my gasping about mountains and trees. I lack the skill
with words necessary to even crudely sketch such things. You simply have
to see it. Instead, I'll tell you about the ugly and fascinating things
I saw. They leave me truly awed.

The first thing that struck me was the vast and penetrating impact of
exurban development.

It was heartbreaking to see just how much of the land is already
destroyed. In California, luxury homes and golf courses fill every level
patch of ground from the outskirts of incorporated Los Angeles to Palm
Springs. Tuscon and Phoenix have similar, lower-budget penumbras of
sprawling exurbs stretching two hundred miles in every direction. In the
space between the outskirts of Palm Springs and the outskirts of Tuscon,
people are busily making preparations to link these two cities with a
continuous smear of houses. I was relieved to notice that many
developments in the margins seem to be abandoned. One of them was
nothing but rain-swelled chip-board and wind-tattered Tyvek nailed to
dozens of identical frames. I regret that the photos didn't turn out.

That isn't to say that I don't have sympathy for the lives and fortunes
that are suffering as a result of the economic pestilence that ruined
these ventures, especially the craftsmen and laborers. But the fact is,
nobody should be building out there. America's natural spaces should be
treated like places of worship. Look at these houses huddling at the
foot of this mountain:

![](http://vort.org/media/images/embarrassed_houses.jpg)

These are money changers in the temple. I'm not against money changers
in general, but they shouldn't ply their trade in my temple. Actually,
this is quite a bit worse than the New Testament parable. The money
changers could be thrown out and the sacred space restored. After the
developers are thrown out, millions of their innocent dupes remain.

As beautiful as it is, this land is both exquisitely fragile and damn
miserable to live on. Fragile because there is so little water, and
miserable for its looming and contrarian propensity for devastating
floods. Fragile because of the trophic poverty of the nutrient-starved
ecosystem, and miserable for its tendency to erupt in sudden racing
conflagration. Fragile because of the extreme sensitivity of the
wildlife to disturbance -- a few scattered bottle caps have likely
doomed the recovery of the California condor -- and miserable for the
tendency of the wildlife to apply claws and fangs and venom to pets and
loved ones. Fragile for the delicate balance of commodity prices and
labor market conditions that make inhabitation possible, and miserable
for the stress and strain of living on the knife's edge of financial
viability, and doubly miserable when the distant rumbling of our global
economic system brings your financial house crashing down on your head.

The only way most people can be comfortable in this kind of place is to
obliterate it. Suck dry the aquifers, poison coyotes, shoot the mountain
lions and the red-tail hawks, pave the chaparral, relocate factories and
office buildings and depots from the distant city, blast and grade the
mountainsides for drainage ditches and flood control swails, murder the
night with the eyewatering glare of sodium vapor floodlamps. Then what
have you got? Just another hot, boring place.

Yes, we can inhabit these places. Such is human ingenuity and power that
given sufficient amounts of dynamite, concrete, oil and steel, we can
probably live anywhere we can reach. We can blast and pave and bulldoze
and burn any landscape to suit our purposes. The great challenge of the
19th and early 20th was to learn how to do these things on the scale
required by the lethally difficult lands of the American West. A hundred
years ago, life in the Mojave desert was so hardscrabble that few of
even the most intrepid adventurers bothered to attempt it. Today, we
build full-scale replicas of Scottish seascapes on which we play golf.

The great challenge of the centuries to come will be to abstain from
exercising this power, and instead develop better enterprises in which
to invest our blood and treasure.
