Title: Travel notes (part 2)
Date: 2008-12-30 19:48:28
Category: general
Slug: travel-notes-part-2
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: financial, crisis, amtrak, housing
Summary: 


As I mentioned in the previous post, I saw an awful lot of houses. Some
of them made me a little jealous, and others made my skin crawl. All of
them got me thinking about the housing crisis.

While the housing bubble was in full swing, I had a very strong
intuitive reaction to house prices; everywhere I looked, I saw prices
that felt two to ten times too high. As it turns out, my intuition was
right. Houses that were worth something were vastly overvalued, and
there were an awful lot of houses that simply should not have been built
at all. The latter was usually due to a combination of uninspired
design, remote location, and natural hazards. Again, it turned out that
I was right. (I don't claim exclusive clairvoyance here. Lots of people
felt the same way.)

There are many things that helped create this situation. The answer the
idiot-media has been pushing is that subprime loans flooded the market
with money by giving loans to people who didn't qualify. The flood of
cash drove up prices, which are now coming down. Leverage is definitely
part of the problem, but the subprime aspect is overblown and widely
misunderstood.

The fundamental problem is that there simply isn't enough affordable
housing. People need homes, and there are good financial reasons why
people want to own their homes. If home prices are out of reach, then of
course people will abuse leverage whenever it is available. The market
simply isn't supplying enough affordable housing.

Why not? The simple answer is the conflict of geography and geometry.

There are two categories of factors that contribute to the value of a
home; the home itself, and the resources that can be tapped from the
home. The resources available from the house provide options to the
homeowner; more options mean better quality of life. More options also
mean that a particular house could satisfy the needs of a greater number
of potential owners, giving it more resale value. History has proved
again and again that the second category is vastly more important than
the first. Hence the expression, "location, location, location." This is
why airless, vermin-infested closet space in Manhattan sells for
millions of dollars while palatial estates in Riverside can be had for
less than a tenth as much. It goes without saying that the owner of the
airless Manhattan flat has access to more resources, and resources of
higher quality, than the owner of the ranch in Riverside. That is the
geographical aspect of the problem.

The geometry aspect comes into play when you consider how structures are
distributed and how resources are made available in these structures.
The Earth provides an approximately two-dimensional plane (actually,
modern economic and military history can be viewed as a consequence of
the increasing importance of the Earth's spherical geometry, but right
now I'm thinking of more local effects -- read, for example, the chapter
"Global Midway" in *War and Remembrance* to get a sense of what I mean).
Resources available from a particular location scale like the square of
the density of resources within the distance accessible from that point.
As the density increases, people will start building upwards (sky
scrapers) and downwards (excavation). This introduces a volumetric
effect, causing the available options to scale like the cube of the
local density of resources. As density continues to increase, it becomes
financially viable to build mass transit, which extends the radius of
practically available options. This introduces a quartic scaling. As the
density increases further, it becomes necessary to seek synergies and
greater efficiency to minimize use of space. This introduces a scaling
at the fifth power of density.

So, as the density of a settlement increases, geometry militates the use
of ever more potent means to reduce the footprint of an available
resource, which in turn facilitates greater density. Each new means of
increasing density adds an additional linear scaling, so that the
ultimate scaling is approximately

$${\cal O}(1+n+n^2+n^3+n^4+n^5+\ldots)={\cal O}(e^n)$$

Of course, a polynomial of infinite order is the Taylor expansion of the
exponential function. So, we can claim that the approximate value of a
home scales exponentially with the density of resources in that area.
The first three terms are required by simple geometry, and higher terms
increasingly represent technological and social responses.

Really, this is the *lower bound* on the value; the value of a home also
depends on how many other people might want it. If people select a home
mostly for the choices it makes available to them, and each person has a
different collection of choices they want, then there is some kind of
combinatorial scaling as well (I'll leave this one as an exercise; you
can get several different scalings depending on the assumptions you
make).

Meanwhile, the value of the house itself scales linearly with the cost
of the stuff you put into building it (labor and materials). However,
nicer houses tend to be larger, and thus neighborhoods of big houses
tend to be sparse. Thus, if the value of a home is the sum of the value
of its location and its embodied value, embodied value will inevitably
be overwhelmed by the locational value. This is a classical Malthusian
conflict, but in this case the functions represent different things.

So, why the crisis? Well, we have artificially capped the growth of
density. Zoning laws forbid the construction of new Manhattans, and
require the gradual erosion of existing high-density neighborhoods as
their buildings wear out and need to be renovated or replaced.

This is the story we tell each other about how this happened; the
automobile gave people greater mobility, allowing them to live in the
suburbs and countryside while they still work in the city. So, there was
a great exodus from city centers to suburbia. This narrative has things
exactly backwards. Density at the city periphery was legally capped and
aggressively driven down, which *forced* people into the suburbs to seek
affordable houses, making automobiles necessary to access resources that
were previously available on foot. The first story is a marketing pitch,
the second is recorded history.

In the early post-war period, opinion surveys consistently showed that
the top transportation issue on the minds of Americans was the
improvement of streetcar service, and the top housing issue was the
rapid inflation of rent and other prices in city centers after the
wartime price controls were lifted. People did not particularly want
cars and suburban bungalows; they simply made a rational choice in the
face of exploding rent and decaying public transportation. Even so,
suburbia remained relatively unattractive for most people until *Brown
vs. Board of Education* in 1954, and picked up steam in the early 1960s
when racial tensions transformed the suburban exodus from an economic
issue into a racial one. See, for example, the abandonment of Detroit,
or white flight from Los Angeles to Orange County. *That* is the story
of suburbia.

There is one more geometric factor to consider regarding the value of a
house. The cheapest possible thing to add to a house is square footage.
The "core" of the house -- the appliances, utilities, cabinetwork and
main structural elements -- represent the bulk of the cost of home
construction. Big houses are worth less, on a per-area basis, than small
ones.

For the last 50 years, we've been building increasingly sparse
neighborhoods of increasingly big houses. In real terms, the cost of
ownership has gone up dramatically (heating, cooling, lighting,
transportation, maintenance, taxes), while the real value of our houses
and neighborhoods has decreased. Both of these scalings are exponential
in nature; a modest increase in square footage translates into an
exponential reduction in value per square foot.

In 1950, the average American home was 983 square feet. In 2004, it was
2349 square feet. In the neighborhoods most impacted by the building
frenzy from 2004 to 2007, it almost doubled again, to around 4000 square
feet for new construction. We're talking about a quadrupling of home
sizes in 50 years!

Bigger homes require more land, and so density of resources available
from these places must scale inversely with the square of home size --
and by the reverse of the argument above, decreasing density introduces
higher order scalings whose sum produces an negative exponential effect.
So, as homes increase in size, their value will exponentially approach
the cost of the raw materials that went into them, until at some point
the value falls beneath the associated costs, and owning one becomes a
net liability.

The benefits and costs of owning a particular home are tied to labor
market conditions, commodity prices, nearby development, and many other
things. Thus, the narrower the margin between the benefits and the
costs, the more likely the normal fluctuations of the economy will land
you with a net liability. Adding leverage into the mix just makes the
margins even narrower.

There is the nub of the issue. "Affordable" doesn't mean low price; it
means getting a lot of value for a given cost (I am using the terms
'value' and 'cost' in a concrete sense, so you may substitute
'enjoyment' and 'effort' if you like). It means having a comfortable
margin between the benefits of home ownership and its associated costs.
It means a margin that is wide enough to absorb the risks we face in the
event that they become realities. It means that you can still pay your
bills if gas prices go up, or if you get a new job, or whatever. This
lack of affordable housing doesn't just hurt poor people, it hurts all
home buyers. We have a huge glut of houses that have virtually no value
in them it all, except maybe as firewood, and almost no available houses
with a decent number of readily available resources.

This isn't a situation we can bounce back from through financial
mumbo-jumbo. The problem is intrinsic to our built infrastructure. The
solution requires physical changes to our landscape. It will take a long
time. Much hay has been made about the culpability of Wall Street in
this crisis, usually portraying "Main Street" as the innocent victim.
This is bullshit. Main Street is just as culpable, and maybe more so.
Solving this crisis will require re-writing building codes and zoning
laws, not just baking regulations. The crisis will ease up when we have
enough compact, high-quality homes in good neighborhoods. By "enough," I
mean we have to keep building them until the prices for these places
puts them within reach of households at or below the median income.

It really doesn't help that our cultural prejudices insist on equating
square footage with value; it is a false economy. Square footage is the
high-fructose corn syrup of our financial system; cheap to produce,
tragically unhealthy, and no matter how much you have, it never
satisfies.
