Title: Turnabout
Date: 2007-08-15 21:24:38
Category: general
Slug: turnabout
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: george, bush, alberto, gonzales, executive, power, death, penalty
Summary: 


Evidently, no one noticed that in passing the reauthorization of the
Patriot Act, Gonzalez will get yet another nifty new power. Now, he can
[fast-track the process of killing
prisoners](http://www.latimes.com/news/politics/la-na-penalty14aug14,0,6468824,full.story?coll=la-home-center).
Hurray!

I wonder if it has ever occurred to the friends of the administration to
wonder how these various expanded powers might be exploited by a
hypothetical power-hungry, incompetent and ruthless ultra left-wing
Democrat. It wasn't *that* long ago that people were actually somewhat
concerned that a seemingly moderate Democrat might turn out to be a
card-carrying Communist taking his instructions (or his ideas) straight
from the Politburo. On the basis of such a possibility, wouldn't one
want to blunt the power of such a disastrous individual by insisting on
a limited executive?

I think we can take Republican party's embrace of expanded executive
power as sufficient proof that they understand that the radical left is
dead. They know that the most sinister thing the Democratic party has to
offer is a few [small-time
crooks](http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=10712500)
and the occasional philanderer. We can take the very fact that
supposedly serious people are willing to promulgate the idea of a
"unitary executive" as evidence that the advocates of the theory do not
expect their political opponents to exploit such powers.

They are probably correct. If one may indulge in some speculation, what
would Al Gore, had he been elected and had turned out to be a
foaming-at-the-mouth enviro-communist, have done with the power to
indefinitely detain people as "enemy combatants?" Whose phones would
evil-universe Al Gore illegally wiretap? I can't imagine any answer to
these questions that isn't just plain silly.

Barring some exceedingly bizarre event (e.g., the conquest of the United
States by space aliens), I will probably vote for one of the Democratic
presidential candidates next November. For the first time in living
memory, we face the refreshing dilemma of choosing among genuinely good
candidates, rather than the drudgery of selecting the least odious. I
have to admit that even my least favorite Democratic candidate would
probably make a pretty good president. But I wouldn't trust *any* of
them with the wiretapping powers Congress granted to *this* president by
passing the legislative turd that I shall dub the Illegal Wiretapping
Reauthorization Act of 2007.

So there you have it, folks. The Republican leadership trusts *any*
Democrat to exercise executive power responsibly and effectively. If
they didn't, then they would be less enthusiastic about the expansion of
executive power. Clearly, they trust the field of Democratic candidates
more than I do.
