Title: Two weeks on a folding bike
Date: 2007-10-21 06:29:35
Category: general
Slug: two-weeks-on-a-folding-bike
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: los, angeles, metro, train, commuting, bicycle, folding, brompton
Summary: 


Since I am now commuting to UCLA from Pasadena, I've spent a lot of time
wondering how to cut down of the time, expense and misery of commuting.
Most of that pondering happened while trapped somewhere on the Ventura
freeway, or the perhaps on driving aimlessly around Westwood looking for
a parking spot.

To that end, I've started using the Metro as much as possible. The Metro
Gold Line is fantastic, and gets me from Lake Street in Pasadena to
Union Station downtown in about 20 minutes (less if I catch an express).
The Purple Line gets me as far as Koreatown, and this is where things
start to suck. From Wilshire and Western, it's about seven miles to
UCLA. During business hours, the 720 bus takes about an hour and 45
minutes to traverse this miserable stretch of urban leprosy. The worst
part is Beverley Hills, which I would gleefully bulldoze if given the
chance.

It's maddening. The first 22 miles of the trip take about 30-45 minutes,
depending on intervals between trains. The last six and a half take
three times that.

While I was riding a 720 bus packed with more people than I attended
high school with, it occurred to me that 6.5 miles in 105 minutes is a
little slower than four miles per hour. I could probably beat that
*walking on my hands*.

So, I bought some new tires for my bicycle, and gave it a try. Sure
enough, I passed five or six 720 busses as they sat like flatulent
beached whales in the morning rush hour traffic. With all the traffic
lights, it's a slow ride, but it takes about 50-60 minutes, so I'm
averaging between 6.5-7.8 miles per hour. In West Los Angeles,
velocities this high are known to cause Cerenkov radiation. I could go a
lot faster if drivers would actually *look at the road* instead of
staring blankly into space while driving their Range Rovers in the bike
lane, parking in the crosswalk or on driving on the sidewalk to get
around busses (yes, really). It would be certain death for a cyclist if
all of this mayhem weren't happening at the speed one can push a loaded
dumpster up a hill.

There is just one problem, though. When you're not riding it, a bicycle
is miserable thing to carry. You may as well be traveling with an
Alexander Calder sculpture.

So, I bought a folding bicycle :

![](http://vort.org/media/images/brompton_m6r.jpg)

This is a [Brompton
M6R](http://www.bromptonbicycle.co.uk/index.cfm?fuseaction=bikerange.mtype).
It folds up really, really tiny, and has little wheels on the bottom to
roll it like a suitcase when it's folded up.

Surprisingly, the small wheels don't seem to make much of a difference
with stability. The only difference, really, is that it takes a lot less
torque to turn the front wheel, even at speed. This makes it feel
"twitchy" at first, but the sensation goes away after about twenty
seconds of riding. The Bromptons also have *really* strong breaks. You
have to be careful not to pitch yourself over the handlebars.

Compared to my road bike, the Brompton is almost alarmingly responsive.
This makes it ideal for crowded situations -- it's easy to avoid
unexpected obstacles, squeeze through narrow spaces, and stop suddenly.
When it's folded up, it's nice to be able to walk down the train
platform without goring people with the pedals or stabbing them with the
quick release levers.

The Brompton has two main disadvantages. First, it's a little on the
heavy side. I didn't shell out for the titanium version, so it weighs in
at 23 pounds. This turns out not to matter very much, except when
lugging it up long flights of stairs. The second disadvantage is that I
must answer a never-ending stream of questions about it.

I will write a more detailed review of the bicycle itself in a few
weeks.
