Title: Uzon, Day One
Date: 2010-08-15 17:01:42
Category: general
Slug: uzon-day-one
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: science, gradschool, kamchatka, thermophiles, russia, eisenlab, metagenomics, research
Summary: 


The day began with a breakfast of rehydrated oatmeal, instant coffee (my
espresso had not yet been located amongst the luggage), and yogurt. Just
as we were drifting off to unpack and organize, a juvenile bear showed
up on our doorstep, and snuffled around a bit near our outhouse and the
little bridge over the stream.

![A bear visiting the research station on our first day in Uzon. That
boardwalk is the path to our outhouse; this was shot with a short lens
from the kitchen porch.](http://vort.org/media/images/bear_at_research_station.jpeg)

This is why we carry signal flares to the toilet, and only go in groups.

After watching the bear wander off to forage for blueberries (which are
everywhere), I sat down on the little bridge and made myself a cup of
espresso from the stream water. The Russian team upstairs tells me that
when they've tested it, it came back almost as clean as the
molecular-grade water they brought with them. It was the best damn
espresso I've ever had.

![Espresso.](http://vort.org/media/images/first_espresso_in_uzon.jpeg) \

Preparations for sampling and measurements proceeded in fits and starts
through the morning as Albert, Frank and Anna hammered out a plan for
each day of the expedition. While that was going on, Bo, Sarah and I
continued unpacking and organizing the gear.

I attempted to shave at the stream, but this did not go as well as the
espresso. Hot water is important for shaving, and I didn't make enough
of it. The stream is only seven degrees Celsius, which I discovered is
utterly unsuitable for shaving.

![Shaving did not go so well.](http://vort.org/media/images/attempt_to_shave.jpeg)


Around ten o'clock, the ranger took us on a tour of the thermal fields.
Frank and Albert have been here several times of course, but the fields
are never quite the same year-to-year. In 2008, for example, a geyser
popped up near the ranger station; Uzon is not known to have geysers.

![Zavarzin, one of my metagenomic targets. Alex is measuring the
temperature, and we worked around some enrichment cultures set up by
another research team.](http://vort.org/media/images/zavarzin_measure.jpeg)


We stopped by Zavarzin Spring along the way, which was particularly
interesting for me. For the last few months, I've been analyzing some
metagenomic data taken from Zavarzin a few years ago as part of the Tree
of Life project. Until today, Zavarzin was just a FASTA file containing
about ten thousand Sanger reads, like so :

 `  >ZAVAK94TR 6000 12000 9000 21 953 
    GTAGCTGTAAGGGCGGGGAGGGCTCACCTGGTCCCGGCCTTCGACGGCGGCCCCAATCCG
    GCCAGCGCCCAGGCCCTCACCGAAGTCGAAGCCTACGCCTTTTCCTGTTCCGATTTCCGG
    AAACTGATAGGGGAGTTCCCCCGGATTGCCGGCAATATCCTGGCCGATTTTGCCGCCAAA 
    TTGCGCCTGCTGGTAGGGCTGGTGGAGGACCTCTCCTTCCGTACGGTGGAGGCGCGTCTG 
    GCCCGTTTCCTCCTGAGCCGGGATGTGGCCGTGCCCGGCCGGCGCTGGACCCAGGAGGAG 
    ATGGCCGCCCACCTGGGCACGGTGCGCGAGGTGGTCGGCCGAGTGCTTCGGGCCTGGCGT 
    GAGGAGGGTCTGATTCGCCAGGAACGCGGCCGCATCGTCATCCTGGACCGGGCCGCGCTG
    GAGAAGAAGGCTCAAATCTGACATCATTCGTGCCAGGACGAGTTATGCAAAGATGTCAGG
    AAAAAGGACTTTTTGACAAAGAGAGGGGAATATGCTACATTGTCAGCCCCGGAGGGCCGG
    CCCGCATGGACCAACCGCATCCGGGTGACCCGAAAGGCAGAAACGTTCGGGCAGGCTGAT
    GATGGACACGTTCCGCGCCATCCGTCGGGTCCTCTGGATCACGATGGGGCTCAACCTTCT
    GGCTATGGCGGCCAAACTGGGCGTGGGCTACCTCACCGGCTCCCTCAGCCTGGTCGCCGA
    CGGCTTCGATTCGGCCTTTGACGGTGCCTCCAACGTGGTGGGGCTGGTGGGGATTTATCT
    GGCCGCCCGACCGGCCGACGAAGGCCACCCCTACGGCCACCGCAAGGCCGAAACCCTCAC
    CGCCCTGGGCGTCTCCGCCCTCCTCTTCCTGACGACCTGGGAACTGGTGAAGAGCGCGGT
    CGAGCGCCTGCGCGACCCGACTCGGATACAGGCCGAGGTCACGGTCTGGAGTTTCGGGGC
    CCTCGTCCTCAGCATCCTGGTGCACGCGACCGTGGTCTGGTACGAGATGCGGGAGGGCCG
    GCGGTTGAGGAGCGATTTCCTGGTGGCCGATGCCCAGCACAC`

After so much time working on this data, it was pretty exciting to see
the actual site.

I came back to the research station with Albert and Bo, and I fixed some
lunch for everyone (apples and pears with Nutella, cheese and black
bread, olives, some cucumbers sliced with lemon and dill, and the
ubiquitous Russian sausage for the meat eaters).

After lunch, everyone except Bo went back to Zavarzin (Bo stayed at the
station to work on the electrodes for his instrument). Albert and Sarah
took measurements and tried out some home-made core samplers, and Anna
and Alex started some enrichment cultures. This was a preliminary trip,
so I mostly just tried to stay out of the way. I got some nice
photographs of the rather extraordinary microbial mats growing in the
smaller springs nearby.

I mentioned in a previous post that volcanic liquids are very diverse;
this is the reason it's worth traveling all the way to Kamchatka. Here
is a nice example of what I was talking about. These are three springs
within about four feet of each other. You can see just by looking at
them that they are different. The colors range from in clear to white to
gray, indicating different redox states (probably of sulfur); the
temperature ranges from 91C, to 86C to 81C, and the pH from 7 to 5.6 to
6.1.

![Three adjacent yet very different springs.](http://vort.org/media/images/the_three_sisters.jpeg)

That might not sound particularly dramatic, but recall that when you
catch a fever, the shift from 37 degrees to 39 degrees is enough to halt
the growth of a wide array of organisms. This is why fever is a response
to infection. Microbes often adapt to very particular circumstances, and
so a change of a few degrees can shift the ecology dramatically, or
replace it altogether. As environments, these three springs are as
different from each other as the inside of your mouth and the eyelid of
a duck.

We finished up with our poking around at Zavarzin, and came home for a
dinner of Borscht prepared by Anna. It was delicious. After dinner, we
started setting up our lab space upstairs for DNA extractions. I managed
to trip the breaker on the generator several times trying to charge up
the UPSs.
