Title: Uzon, Day Zero
Date: 2010-08-12 08:25:52
Category: general
Slug: uzon-day-zero
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: science, gradschool, kamchatka, thermophiles, russia, eisenlab, metagenomics, research
Summary: 


We were picked up by a mini-bus taxi from our apartment in
Petropavlovsk, only to have to turn around to retrieve a forgotten
jacket whose owner shall remain nameless. From there, we drove to
Kronotsky Nature Preserve, and met up with a bunch of other people
including Shpilenok, the director of the preserve, a Russian TV station
crew, and some photographers. Also aboard was a group of people that
included the granddaughters of Tatiana Ustinova, the woman who
discovered the Valley of the Geysers with Anisifor Krupenin in 1941.

The discovery of the valley is an adventure all unto itself -- beginning
with a dogsled trip that got off track and ending up with the discovery
of first hydrothermal site in Russia. Tatiana, who eventually settled in
Vancouver, passed away recently. Her family was aboard our helicopter on
a visit in her memory to Geyser Valley. Her valley, one could say.

Frank spent much of our time in Petropavlovsk regaling us with stories
of helicopters left over from Russia's war in Afghanistan and held
together with bits of string. If our helicopter was that old, it has
been lovingly maintained.

![Our ride to Uzon touching down at the airfield.](http://vort.org/media/images/our_helicopter_to_uzon.jpeg)

I was expecting the ride itself to be exciting, but there is none of the
rush and acceleration of an airplane takeoff; when a helicopter takes
off, it gets very, very loud, and rises with all the grace and charm of
a freight elevator. The excitement came entirely from the view out the
portal, which we could open. Kronotsky Nature Preserve is spectacularly
beautiful from any angle; as interesting as it was to see it from the
air, I kept wishing we would land so I could get out and have a look
around.

![The view from the helicopter portal as we entered Kronotsky Nature Preserve.](http://vort.org/media/images/view_from_portal.jpeg)

I lost track of how many volcanoes we passed. The most exciting was
Karimsky, which happened to erupt just as I snapped a picture of it!

![Karymsky Volcano erupting as we fly nearby.](http://vort.org/media/images/Eruption_of_Karymsky_volcano_1.jpeg)


Actually, I didn't take this picture. There was a photographer sitting
next to me using the same portal, and I had asked him to snap a few
shots of Karimsky -- which was not erupting at the time -- because he
had a better angle from were he was sitting. He snapped one shot of the
volcano and gasped, and then dropped my camera in his lap and grabbed
his own.

![Karymsky Volcano erupting as we fly nearby.](http://vort.org/media/images/Eruption_of_Karymsky_volcano_2.jpeg)

![Eruption of Karymsky Volcano continues as we fly over an inland delta.](http://vort.org/media/images/Eruption_of_Karymsky_volcano_3.jpeg)

We touched down in Uzon Caldera a few minutes later, and immediately ran
into some confusion over accommodations. There are two buildings in Uzon
Caldera; a ranger station, and the research station. The structures are
each about the size of a modest single family home. There was already a
team from Winigradsky Institute staying at the research station (the
director, actually), as well as the ranger and an entomologist.
Meanwhile, the ranger station is being renovated, and the work crew is
staying there.

![Our ride continuing on to Geyser Vally. The family of Tatiana Ustinova were aboard.](http://vort.org/media/images/helicopter_dropping_us_off.jpeg)

The helicopter crew had been told that we would be staying at the ranger
station for some reason, and so the earlier flight had delivered all of
our food and lab equipment to the landing pad nearest the ranger
station. The ranger station is about a kilometer away from the research
station, and so we had to schlep all thirteen boxes of lab equipment and
four heavy boxes of food.

![Shifting our food and lab equipment from the ranger station to the research station. It was a long and exhausting job.](http://vort.org/media/images/moving_boxes_uzon.jpeg)

Once installed at the research station, Sarah, Bo and I organized our
gear and luggage, and Frank and Albert -- dead tired, like the rest of
us -- went upstairs bearing gifts to make friends with the other
research team.

We rehydrated some freeze-dried pasta primavera, to which Sara and I
added tofu. I was too hungry to notice what everyone else ate, but I
think sausage was involved. Then we passed out.
