Title: Uzon, Day Five
Date: 2010-08-20 15:36:00
Category: general
Slug: uzon-day-five
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: science, gradschool, kamchatka, thermophiles, russia, eisenlab, metagenomics, research
Summary: 


*This post is for August 10th, 2010*

The weather is absolutely beautiful today; sunny with a few puffy,
fast-moving clouds, about 60F with gusts of cool wind.

After breakfast, Frank, Alex, Anna and I hiked to Orange Field. Most of
the hike was over open country without trails; we had the GPS
coordinates, but no route. We passed through a few stands of birch and
pine. The prospect of encountering a bear in enclosed areas makes
entering these clumps of trees an unattractive course of action, one
could say. Encountering the occasional bear seems to be unavoidable in
Uzon, so we stuck to open country and burned up some calories circling
around the trees. The August sun could have made this torture back in
Davis, but at almost 55 degrees north with patches of snow lurking in
the shady spots of the caldera, it wasn't so bad.

![A meadow abutting the caldera wall on the hike to Orange Field
springs.](http://vort.org/media/images/orange_field_hike.jpeg)

It's astonishing how much plant diversity there is here. What looks like
fields from a distance are really dense mixtures of dozens (hundreds?)
of species of plant, crowded together in a tangled riot. When I put my
face near the ground, it looks a tropical rain forest, only ten inches
high.

We are here to study microbes, but it's very difficult not to wonder
about this hardy community of plants. How do they survive the winter?
Why does one kind of plant cluster in one place and not another? For
what do they compete, and how do they do it? Do any of them cooperate?
How do the seeds disperse? What pollinates the flowers?

I am puzzled I that there seem to be so few pollinators in Uzon. I found
a few insects that looked like bees, but I'm not familiar enough with
entomology to rule out the possibility that they could be bee-like
flies, or possibly wasps. In any event, there were not very many of
them. The only insect I found visiting a flower today is a thing that
looked like an earwig, but it was probably there because it took a wrong
turn somewhere. The millions of flowers in Uzon seem to go mostly
unvisited.

![<a href="http://vort.org/media/images/orange_field_overlook.jpeg">Panorama from the ridge overlooking Orange Field springs.</a>)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/rneches/4911186653/)

Anya was here in Uzon in 2005, except a few weeks later in the year. In
her pictures from that expedition, the whole caldera looks like it's
been set afire as the hardwood brush gets ready to drop its leaves.

The other thing that puzzles me was how few birds there are. The caldera
is bursting with blueberries and mosquitoes, and yet I've seen only one
swallow and heard not a single songbird. Meadows in California with a
tenth the productivity (i.e., insects, fruit and seeds) are usually
crammed with swallows, starlings (introduced, of course), jays, finches
and songbirds. In Uzon, there are only a few white, long-winged birds
with V-shaped tails that fly low and fast above the streams. They look a
bit like a quarter-scale seagull, but re-engineered for speed and
extreme distance-flying. They have bodies built like marathon runners,
so I suppose Uzon must be a quick stop on a long journey for them. I've
only seen two or three of these on a given day so far.

The lack of birds, especially songbirds, and the lack of pollinators are
probably related. The winter in Kamchatka is too harsh for most birds to
overwinter, so most birds found here would be migratory. Insects are
ideal diet for a long-distance migratory birds, and they need lots of
them to build up enough fat reserves for their world-crossing journeys.
Maybe our timing is off, and we've just missed the migratory birds, or
maybe they will arrive later when the blueberries are riper, or when
their favorite species of insect reaches its crescendo. Or, perhaps the
birds that used to come here are gone, their migratory route destroyed
by a parking lot in a faraway place.

![A carnivorous plant waits for the arrival of small, unlucky insects on
the bank of Orange Field springs.](http://vort.org/media/images/uzon_carnivorous_plant.jpeg)

Karnosky National Biosphere Preserve is for Russia what Yellowstone,
Yosemite and the Grand Canyon are to America. It is perhaps the single
most beloved natural site in this vast country, and the people who have
studied and explored it are heroes in Russia (they should be heroes
worldwide). Tatiana Ustinova, who discovered the Valley of the Geysers,
could be the John Muir of Russia. I'm sure that someone has studied the
songbirds in Uzon, or lack thereof, just as the songbirds of Yosemite
have been meticulously studied. However, Ustinova only discovered the
Valley of the Geysers in 1941, whereas Yosemite and Hetch Hetchy were
well known to the world more than a hundred years prior.

The problem, I think, is the disconnect of the scientific literature
among countries. Before I left for Kamchatka, I looked for books like
John Muir Laws' [beautifully illustrated field
guide](http://www.amazon.com/Sierra-Nevada-California-Academy-Sciences/dp/159714052X)
to the plants, fungi and animals of the Sierras, but I could not find
anything. My questions have probably been asked and answered, but only
in Russian, and probably only in journals far from the beaten path.

I hope that this will change.

![Debris left over from Karpov's old house (I think), which was heated
by geothermal power. I'm holding the auger used to drill the well.](http://vort.org/media/images/drilling_debris.jpeg)

At Orange Field, Alex and Anna collected several samples for their
colleagues at the Russian Academy of Science. We spent about two hours
roaming around and waiving Anna's GPS at the sky, trying to pinpoint
which spring was which. This is an uncertain proposition in a place like
Uzon, which is subject to the vicissitudes snow, snowmelt erosion, the
dynamic processes of volcanism, and curious bears that like to dig
holes.

![Team Russia, for the win!](http://vort.org/media/images/orange_field_sampling.jpeg)

When we got back, we ran the generator for a while so Sarah could do her
DNA extractions. I used the opportunity to work on metagenomic analysis
for Arkashin and Zavarzin a bit, organize photos, assemble some
panoramas, and edit the last couple of days of blog entries. I also got
in some really excellent procrastination on finishing my talk. I
squished one hundred and sixteen mosquitoes and three biting black
flies.

Anna made Borscht for us again, and it was, if anything, even more
delicious than her previous Borscht. Same ingredients, same pot, same
stove, same sour cream. I am puzzled, but that seems to be my lot in
life.
