Title: Uzon, Day Six
Date: 2010-08-20 16:44:23
Category: general
Slug: uzon-day-six
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: science, gradschool, kamchatka, thermophiles, russia, eisenlab, metagenomics, research
Summary: 


*This post is for August 11th, 2010*

Russia is working hard to reign in the chaos that followed the end of
the Soviet Union, and Kronotsky National Biosphere Park is no exception.
Restrictions on hunting and fishing that were once widely ignored or
impossible to implement are now being enforced. The rules are not
exactly settled, but it is clear that the park administration is serious
about protecting the wild state of the preserve. This is a Very Good
Thing.

In 2005, Frank joined an expedition to Uzon led by Juergen Wiegel; this
was before the research station was built, and so they flew in several
large tents packed in crates. The crates could be unfolded to form a
platform for the tents. When they broke camp, they left the crates
behind. If the park administration is going to be serious about
protecting the natural state of the caldera, Frank and Albert thought it
would be a good idea to do our part too. So, we spent the morning
breaking down the crates at the 2004 camp. We then hauled the
disassembled crates to the research station (new since 2004), and
arranged them in neat stacks. The rangers will find some use for the
wood now that in easy reach, I'm sure.

When we arrived, the crates from the old camp were piled up in the
middle of the camp. I'm not sure exactly how long the crates were
splayed over the ground at the old site (they were designed to form a
platform for the tents) before they were piled up there, but I find it
interesting that the footprint of the old camp is still clearly visible.
The plants are still in the process of recolonizing the space. There can
be no more explicit evidence that Uzon's ecology is indeed fragile. The
lush meadows I wrote about yesterday would probably take decades or
centuries to form if they had to start over from scratch. I'm sorry I
don't have any pictures; one cannot be both a good photographer and
diligent manual labor at the same time.

![Alex thinks he has pulled a fast one on me. Anna is not amused by any
of this. Not even Frank's hat.](http://vort.org/media/images/pi_and_e_in_crackers.jpeg)

After lunch, Frank and I set out together to collect some samples from
Burlyaschy and K4 Well.

![Collecting a sample from Burlyaschy (Boiling Spring). It's about 90C
where my feet are, and it's deeper than my ankles. It's a good thing I'm
wearing thigh waders and three pairs of socks!](http://vort.org/media/images/burlyaschy_sampling_bottle.jpeg)

While Frank was working on his own samples, I waded a few meters into
Burlyaschy Spring to fill a liter bottle with water. The water is about
90C there, and boiling vigorously only three or four meters beyond. I
was wearing three layers of insulated gloves, and three pairs of socks
under my waders, but the heat was almost unbearable. You really don't
want to fall down in this thing!

![Filtering a liter of water from Burlyaschy with a Sterivex filter and
a 60ml syringe. The bottle was almost too hot to handle, even with
insulated gloves. If there's anything alive in the planktonic community,
it's definitely a hyperthermophile!](http://vort.org/media/images/burlyaschy_filtering.jpeg)

After (carefully) returning to what passes for dry land in the thermal
field, I decanted the liter bottle into a 60ml syringe with a LuerLok
fitting, and attached a Sterivex-HV 0.45 micron filter. I then forced
the water through the filter, which started to block up after about
600ml. The last 300ml went through really, really slowly and with a lot
of sweat and cursing. It took a 20 repetitions to finish off the bottle.

![Decanting spring water collected from K4 Well into a 60ml syringe, to
be forced through a Sterivex filter.](http://vort.org/media/images/k4_well_filtering.jpeg)

After that, we walked over to K4 Well to collect Frank's slides. Frank
is planning to use them for electron microscopy, so he had to fix them
before storing them, which took a long time. This gave me time to
process two liters of water and steam spewing from the rupture on the K4
wellhead and shove them through two more Sterivex filters.

We walked back to the station, and I fixed my filters in ethanol and
D-PBS buffer.

This was to be our last full day in Uzon, so I packed most of my things
before going to bed. Albert and Sarah stayed up all night finishing the
DNA extractions.
