Title: Uzon, Day Four
Date: 2010-08-19 04:16:49
Category: general
Slug: uzon-day-four
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: science, gradschool, kamchatka, thermophiles, russia, eisenlab, metagenomics, research
Summary: 


*This post is for August 9th, 2010*

It was very cold, wet and windy this morning, and I had a rough time
getting started. A double shot of espresso helped, but it took a brisk
hike to Burlyaschy to collect my first samples of the expedition to
actually wake up.

![Collecting sediment samples from the outflow of Burlyaschy (Boiling
Spring). This is my first field sample since starting grad school.
Neat!](http://vort.org/media/images/sampling_at_boiling_spring.jpeg)

Frank and I thought it might be interesting to try to sample from the
center of the spring near the heat source, so we tied a 50ml tube and a
rock to a rope and dragged it across the bottom of the pool a few times.
It didn't work, unfortunately, so we're going to try using a long tube
and a hand pump tomorrow.

![Our improvised sampling gadget. It didn't work unfortunately. The
bottom of Burlyaschy evidently doesn't have any sediment.](http://vort.org/media/images/sampling_gadget.jpeg)

Our efforts were interrupted by a bear, a real one this time, that
wandered out from behind a hummock about fifty feet away. We dropped
what we were doing and circled to the bank of Burlyaschy opposite the
bear. In principle, we could sidle in one direction or the other to keep
the spring between us and the bear. A bear can easily outrun a human in
a straight line, but on a turn, particularly in boiling mud, we have a
better chance. If it tried to cross the pool, we would quickly end up
with a few thousand gallons of bear-and-microbe soup.

![A bear interrupted our work at Burlyaschy.](http://vort.org/media/images/bear_at_boiling_spring.jpeg)

Happily, the bear showed little interest in us, and wandered off. It
doesn't make for great photography, but I've decided that the preferred
view of a bear is the posterior as it walks away.

![Fortunately, he showed very little interest in us.](http://vort.org/media/images/bear_at_boiling_spring_2.jpeg)

We returned to the station without incident and had some lunch. Alex and
Anna went off to collect some samples for their colleagues in Moscow,
while Frank and Bo packed up his computer, a huge APC power supply, and
his scanning voltometry apparatus lumbered off to Red White and Green.
Right now, Sarah and I are upstairs with the Russian expedition to use
the lab bench for DNA extractions.

![Sarah working on DNA extractions.](http://vort.org/media/images/sarah_DNA_extraction.jpeg)

Later on, the weather cleared up to reveal an extrodinary afternoon. I
was persuaded to go to so-called Bath Pool with the Russians. I'm not
sure if I am any cleaner as a result, but the experience was...
interesting.

![Anna and Alex returning from Central Thermal Field.](http://vort.org/media/images/alex_and_anna_returning.jpeg)
