Title: Weak sauce
Date: 2008-09-25 15:17:36
Category: general
Slug: weak-sauce
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: gas, financial, crisis
Summary: 


So, it looks like once again, the Democrats are letting themselves get
stampeded into yet another colossal Whitehouse-hyped fiasco. Everyone is
so very impressed with Henry Paulson and Ben Bernanke, and their
wonderful credentials, that they're willing to take their bullshit at
face value. Remember Colin Powel's photos of Iraqi mobile weapons labs?
Remember the incredible haste with with which Congress was forced to ram
through amnesty for treasonous telecommunication companies? Remember the
\$300 billion we blew on the [Economic Stimulus Act of
2008](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_Stimulus_Act_of_2008)? Like
most Americans, I sent most of mine to the Saudis. Pfft.

I am continuously astonished by the ability of conservatives to refuse
to, you know, *conserve*. When difficult times come along, there is
somehow always a refusal to prioritize and make sacrifices. That doesn't
make the difficult times go away, so instead we end up sacrificing
important things instead of unimportant things. For example, when it was
clear a few months ago that consumer spending was flagging, it was
decided that putting a few extra dollars in the people's pockets would
help.

What did Congress do, at the urging of the Whitehouse? It borrowed the
money. If that were the only way to put a few hundred bucks in people's
pockets, then so be it. But it wasn't. One of the things that was taking
money *out* of people's pockets was the spike in gasoline prices. Push
prices down, and everyone who uses gasoline would be that much richer.
What's the simplest way to reduce gas prices? Why, to use less of it, of
course. What's the simplest way to do that? Impose a speed limit. Duh.

A *conservative* financial decision would have been to lay it out to the
American people this way: We can either borrow the money to give to you,
and then make you pay for it with higher debt maintenance payments and
higher taxes, or we can impose a 55 MPH speed limit for 200 days. Now,
driving 55 sucks, but don't you think it'd be worth it to avoid running
up the debt? Don't you think it'd be worth it for lower prices and a
little extra money in your pocket every week?

But no! Driving huge vehicles far, fast and for no reason is the
American Way of Life! It's evidently more important to protect the
sanctity of the gas pedal than to safeguard the solvency of our
republic.
