Title: Why YouTube Matters
Date: 2006-10-29 18:19:13
Category: general
Slug: why-youtube-matters
Author: Russell Neches
Tags: copyright, censorship
Summary: 


> *Originality is what we do with what we did not originate.* \
> --- Eric Hoffer

One of the most fundamental tools available to the scholar is the
quotation. Without it, the scholar would be forced to derive everything
from first principles, or to rely on her audience to examine and absorb
the material from cited works. Citation, for obvious reasons, is only
useful of the audience has access to the cited works in the first place.
Much of academic discourse would be impossible without the ability of
scholars to quote one another.

The same is true in any area where ideas are currency. It is difficult
to formulate a coherent critique of *anything* that does not dissect
specific passages. This is perhaps the principle factor that has
propelled blogs into the mainstream political arena; blogs routinely
quote lengthy passages from their sources, whereas newspapers do not.
They quote television transcripts, speeches, newspaper articles, radio
broadcasts, other blogs, books, pamphlets, magazine articles, private
emails and public records. The medium trivializes the process required
to include very lengthy quotes and to quote sources in entirety. This is
the main advantage blogs have over other media; they can provide the
most complete communication of the referenced material with the least
effort on the part of the author and the audience.

The defining characteristic of a blog is not the cost of publication, or
immediacy, or any of the other oft-discussed advantages of blogs. On the
contrary: Television and radio will always have the upper hand on
immediacy, and newspaper websites can match blogs on that as well. The
cost of publication is only small if you happen to be very unpopular. A
large blog like DailyKos requires a financial commitment the same or
larger than the websites of many nationally respected newspapers. Blogs
are important because the content is different from other media, and the
most significant difference is the use of quoted material. In style,
length and in the quality of the writing, a blog post may most closely
resemble a hastily composed personal email, but in structure and form,
the heavy use of quotations in support of arguments strongly resembles
scholarly writing. Blogs are casual scholarship.

This is why it is critically important for sites like YouTube to be
allowed to re-publish copyrighted material. Quotation is an essential
tool for critical analysis. The nature of the broadcast and distribution
systems for television, movies and radio make it cost prohibitive or
even impossible for the audience to obtain and comprehend the cited
work. It is insufficient to say, "what Keith Olberman said seven minutes
and sixteen seconds into the broadcast of last Tuesday's edition of his
show." To impose such limitations on scholarship, casual or otherwise,
is to prohibit discussion.

The right to use copyrighted material, without permission, in original
work is a well-established aspect of fair use. Children across the
country are taught how to go to the library and extract and cite quotes
for their assignments. Thousands of journals publish articles *riddled*
with quotations from copyrighted works every month. The standards of
plagiarism and academic honesty are appropriate for this sort of work,
the standards of theft and property ownership are not. The practice of
"quoting" video clips is a practice frequently used by television
producers themselves. There is a double standard in operation here:
Comedy Central asserts that bloggers do not have the right to display
clips of Jon Stewart's *Daily Show*, yet Jon Stewart's *Daily Show* may
display clips of CNN, CBS, NBC and ABC broadcasts.

Clearly, the law grants the owners of the cited works some exclusive
rights to those works. However, it is just as important to protect the
rights of the public to use those works in original work. It is
inappropriate to apply standards that require a person to belong to a
particular community ("serious" academics or "serious" news
broadcasters) in order to be granted the right to quote copyrighted
material.

Google is wrong to excise clips from YouTube without requiring the
copyright owners to demonstrate that the clips are not being used as
legitimate quotations in original works.

Of course, I can't be the only, or even the first person to come to this
conclusion. As Abraham Lincoln said, "Books serve to show a man that
those original thoughts of his aren't very new at all."
